Page 6:
www.ijcrsee.com  422 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  an average of more than 16 hours per week ( Leveson, McNeil and Joiner, 2013 ).   Bean (1980)   examined  the impact of personal circumstances on students’ decision to drop out. The results showed that the  impact of difficult personal circumstances can lead to an intention to drop out.   Pascarella and Terenzini  (1991)   demonstrated that the university environment and students’ circumstances influence the decision  to continue their education. The results also indicated that personal circumstances can be essential to  the dropout decision process. Students’ concerns about mental health, physical health, homesickness, or  accumulating debt positively correlate with their intention to drop out ( Willcoxson, 2010 ).  H13: Personal circumstances positively impact students’ dropout intentions in Ho Chi Minh City.  Figure 1. Proposed research model  Materials and Methods  Process research:   A mixed-methods research approach combining qualitative and quantitative  research methods was used in this study.  Preliminary qualitative and quantitative research:   A group interview method was employed with  15 students in the qualitative phase of the study. The research topic involved collecting opinions from first-,  second-, and third-year students at public and private universities in suburban and urban areas of Ho Chi  Minh City. The group discussion aimed to identify factors influencing the intention to drop out and refine  the measurement scales of the research concepts to align with the research context. The results of the  interviews were synthesized and adjusted to form a draft measurement scale to support the preliminary  quantitative research and the formal quantitative research. Subsequently, a survey was conducted with  80 students to evaluate the reliability using Cronbach’s Alpha coefficient and perform Exploratory Factor  Analysis (EFA) to examine the convergent and discriminant validity of the measurement scale.  Formal quantitative research:   The study utilized the Bootstrapping technique with a sample size  of N = 5000 to test the hypotheses. This step was employed to evaluate the measurement model and the  structural model:  The measurement model was assessed by examining measurement scale reliability, composite  reliability, convergent validity, and discriminant validity. To ensure the reliability of the measurement scales,  Cronbach’s alpha coefficient and Composite Reliability (CR) should exceed 0.6 ( Hair Jr et al., 2009 ). The  Average Variance Extracted (AVE) of each construct in the model should be greater than 0.5, based on  the criteria proposed by   Shiau, Sarstedt and Hair (2019) . The study followed the criteria of   Fornell and

Page 7:
www.ijcrsee.com  423 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  Larcker (1981)   to test the discriminant validity of the measurement scales, where the square root of the  AVE of each construct should be greater than the correlation coefficient between that construct and the  other constructs in the model.  The structural model was evaluated based on criteria such as the coefficient of determination (R2),  predictive relevance (Q2), and effect size (f 2 ). The coefficient of determination (R2) values of the model  were interpreted as follows: weak (R2 = 0.02), moderate (R2 = 0.16), and robust (R2 = 0.26) explanations  of the model variance ( Cohen, 2013 ). The Stone-Geisser Q² criterion was used for predictive relevance  assessment, following the evaluation standards proposed by Henseler, Ringle, and Sinkovics (2009):  weak prediction (Q2 < 0,02); moderate prediction (Q2 within [0,02; 0,35]), and strong prediction (Q2 >  0,35). Lastly, the effect size (f 2 ) between corresponding components was examined, with weak effect (f 2  = 0.02), moderate effect (f 2   = 0.15), and substantial effect (f 2   = 0.35) based on the criteria of   Henseler,  Ringle and Sinkovics (2009) .  Scale measurement:   The research model consists of 13 research constructs. The dependent  variable is Dropout Intentions, which was adopted by   Farr-Wharton et al. (2018) . The independent  variables include Lack of university commitment, Degree and course commitment, Ineffective time  management, teaching skills and attitudes of instructors, Instructor support, Curriculum design, Positive  instructor feedback, Ineffective adaptation to the Learning Environment, Low Classroom Engagement,  University facilities, Cultural and social environment, Access to support from academic advisors, and  Personal Circumstances. These independent variables were inherited and adjusted from the study by  Willcoxson (2010) . These independent variables were inherited and adjusted from the study by   Willcoxson  (2010) . There are a total of 74 observed variables, and they were measured using a 5-point Likert scale:  (1) Strongly Disagree, (2) Disagree, (3) Neutral, (4) Agree, and (5) Strongly Agree (see Table 1).  Table 1  Scale measurement  Formal sample  Survey Sample Criteria: First- year, second- year, and third- year university students studying at  expected public and private universities located within the inner city and suburban areas of Ho Chi Minh  City. This study did not survey fourth-year students as they rarely intend to drop out.  Sampling Method: The study employed a non-probability convenience sampling method. The

Page 8:
www.ijcrsee.com  424 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  survey questionnaire was distributed directly and online through Google Forms at various universities in  Ho Chi Minh City. The survey was conducted from February 13, 2023, to March 16, 2023.  Data Analysis Method: The study utilized Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-  SEM) to analyze the data. This method was chosen due to its advantage in handling small sample sizes  and data that do not follow normal distribution assumptions ( Shiau, Sarstedt and Hai, 2019 ).  Formal Sample: The survey results yielded 804 valid responses. Therefore, the study used 804  observations as the formal sample for this research.  Results  Sample characteristics  Gender breakdown with the number of female students being 392 (48.8%) and the number of  male students being 412 (51.2%). Next is the breakdown of students by academic year, with 239 (29.7%)  first-year students, 261 (32.5%) second-year students, 304 (37.8%) third-year students, and no fourth-  year students. Following that is the breakdown of students by major, with the corresponding number  of students in each major. The majors listed are Engineering with 163 students (20.3%), Economics  - International Trade with 133 students (16.5%), Business - Management with 158 students (19.7%),  Foreign Languages with 63 students (7.8%), Information Technology (IT) with 64 students (8.0%), Social  Sciences and Humanities with 25 students (3.1%), and other majors with 198 students (24.6%). Next is  the geographical breakdown, with the number of suburban students being 284 (35.3%) and the number  of downtown students being 520 (64.7%).  The university group includes various universities, with the corresponding number of students in  each university. The listed universities are Open University of Ho Chi Minh City with 70 students (8.7%),  Ho Chi Minh City University of Transport with 60 students (7.5%), Industrial University of Ho Chi Minh City  with 184 students (22.9%), Ho Chi Minh City University of Technical Education with 71 students (8.8%),  Nong Lam University with 80 students (10.0%), Van Lang University with 71 students (8.8%), UEF School  of Economics and Finance with 53 students (6.6%), HUTECH University with 62 students (7.7%), Nguyen  Tat Thanh University with 79 students (9.8%), and FPT University with 74 students (9.2%). Finally, the  group with intentions to drop out is divided into two categories: those with intentions to drop out, totaling  206 (25.6%), and those without intentions to drop out, totaling 598 (74.4%).  Table 2  Participants’ Characteristics

Page 13:
www.ijcrsee.com  429 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  Model evaluation:   The estimation results of the model using the Bootstrapping method with a  sample size of 5,000 are depicted in Figure 2.  Figure 2.   PLS-SEM estimation results  Table 6  Hypothesis test results  (Source: own author)  The quality of the proposed model is assessed through the R2 values and the Stone-Geisser index  (Q2). Table 6 shows that the R2 value for SDI is 0.30, more significant than 0.26. According to   Cohen  (2013)   evaluation criteria, the model’s predictive power is considered strong. The Stone-Geisser value

Page 14:
www.ijcrsee.com  430 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  from Q²SDI is 0.178, falling within the range of (0.02-0.35). Following the evaluation criteria of   Henseler  and Chin (2010) , the model’s predictive ability is considered moderate. Additionally, the effect size (f 2 ) of  the factors influencing students’ intention to drop out is evaluated as weak. According to,   Hair et al. (2019) ,  the influence of factors with f 2   values is all < 0.02.  The results of the hypothesis testing indicate that the lack of university commitment positively  impacts students’ intention to drop out (H1: B = 0.268; p = 0.000 < 0.01); thus, H1 is accepted. Next,  degree and course commitment negatively impact students’ intention to drop out (H2: B = -0.1, p = 0.006  < 0.01); thus, H2 is accepted. Similarly, ineffective time management positively impacts students’ intention  to drop out (H3: B = 0.172, p-value = 0.000 < 0.01). Thus, H3 is accepted.  However, the hypotheses H4 and H5 are not supported in this study (B = -0.064; p-value > 10%;  B = -0.014 > 10%). Additionally, the curriculum design negatively impacts students’ intention to drop out,  so H6 is accepted (B = -0.088, p-value = 0.079 < 10%). Moreover, the positive instructor feedback does  not impact students’ intention to drop out, so H7 is rejected. Furthermore, ineffective adaptation to the  learning environment and low classroom participation all have a positive impact on a student’s intention  to drop out; thus, H8 and H9 are supported (B = 0.116; p-value = 0.001 < 1%; B = 0.123; p-value = 0.001  < 0.001). Hypotheses H10, H11, and H12 are not supported in this study. Lastly, personal circumstances  positively impact a student’s intention to drop out; thus, H13 is accepted (B = 0.09; p-value = 0.008 < 1%).  Table 7  Differences in dropout intentions by gender, location, and type of university

Page 20:
www.ijcrsee.com  436 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  SAI4: The faculty team clearly communicates their expectations from the students right  from the beginning.  SAI5: The professors always create a sense of closeness with the students.  SAI6: I have encountered difficulties in understanding the accent of some instructors  while listening.  SAI7: I have had some unpleasant experiences with certain instructors.  Instructor support (IS)  IS1: I have received support from the instructors  IS2: Instructors are sensitive to the individual needs of students  IS3: Instructors often strive to meet my needs.  IS4: The faculty team is always available when I need them.  IS5: My professors genuinely make an effort to understand the difficulties students face  in their learning process.  Curriculum design (CD)  CD1: My professors incorporate real-life examples into their teaching curriculum.  CD2: What I am learning at the university has been researched and proven.  CD3: I am satisfied with the job experiential opportunities introduced by the university.  Positive instructor feedback (PIF)  PIF1: I received helpful feedback on the assessment tasks.  PIF2: I received prompt feedback on the tasks.  Ineffective adaptation to learning environment (IALE)  IALE1: I have the potential to succeed after completing your university education.  IALE2: My study program is too demanding.  IALE3: I believe that my essay writing skills are sufficient for university-level study.  IALE4: I find it difficult to understand various study materials.  IALE5: I struggle to adapt to the teaching methods at the university.  IALE6: I need good analytical skills in order to understand the content.  IALE7: I need a good memory in order to study effectively.  Low classroom participation (LCP)  LCP1: My classes are engaging and interesting.  LCP2: I enjoy the intellectual challenges that come with what I am studying.  LCP3: I appreciate the opportunity to interact with students from diverse cultural back -  grounds at the university.  LCP4: When working in groups, I enjoy collaborating with peers from different cultural  backgrounds.  LCP5: I actively participate in class discussions.  LCP6: I make it a habit to attend class and prepare the required materials in advance.  LCP7: I frequently skip classes.  LCP8: I don't attend classes because the study materials are available on the website.  LCP9: I often seek advice from my instructors.  LCP10: I am diligent in my studies at school.  University facilities (UF)  UF1: The classrooms provide a high-quality learning environment.

Page 21:
www.ijcrsee.com  437 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  UF2: The library is spacious, well-ventilated, and offers a diverse range of study materi -  als.  UF3: The information technology system meets my usage needs.  UF4: The classrooms are very spacious.  UF5: The class schedule is convenient for me.  Cultural and social environment (CSE)  CSE1: The facilities of the university meet my social needs.  CSE2: The facilities of the university are suitable for my religious/cultural needs.  CSE3: I am sensitive to students from different cultural backgrounds.  CSE4: I appreciate the physical facilities and environment of the university campus.  CSE5: I feel a sense of belonging to the university community.  CSE6: I sometimes feel lonely in the university.  CSE7: I find it easy to commute to the university.  Access to support from academic advisors (ASA)  ASA1: I receive good advice from the university regarding career choices.  ASA2: I receive good advice from a career counselor in choosing a profession for my -  self.  ASA3: I receive good advice from the university regarding career choices.  ASA4: I easily receive assistance when needed from the management team.  ASA5: The management team is always ready to assist when I need them.  ASA6: The staff at the university are often sensitive to the personal needs of students.  ASA7: Having an advisor at the university is very helpful.  Personal circumstances (PC)  PC1: I worry about my mental health.  PC2: I worry about my physical health.  PC3: I often feel homesick.  PC4: I worry about the accumulating debt while studying at university.  PC5: I have financial issues.

Page 1:
www.ijcrsee.com  417 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  Introduction  Education is one of the foremost concerns for countries worldwide. The sustainable development of  a nation relies not only on its economic, social, and cultural conditions but also on improving its education  system. Especially with the advent of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, the role of education is increasingly  emphasized in developing a high-quality workforce. There has been an increase in the number of students  enrolling in higher education institutions annually in foreign countries. However, the number of students  who want to leave university without obtaining a degree has also significantly increased ( Schnettler et al.,  2020 ). Approximately 15% of university students intend to drop out, which has become a severe issue  ( Sheldon and Epstein, 2004 ). According to the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics)  education approach, the estimated dropout rate of students is around 40-50%. The dropout status of  students not only negatively affects the students themselves and the university and society as a whole  ( Schnettler et al., 2020 ).  In Vietnam, universities have also observed numerous cases of student dropouts. For example,  Industrial University of Ho Chi Minh City has issued warnings to 2,252 students who voluntarily dropped  out. University of Transport and Communication has warned 2,135 students regarding their academic  performance, with 257 students facing expulsion. The Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology and  Education has removed the names of over 450 students forced to discontinue their studies. The Ho Chi  Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intentions in Ho Chi Minh City,  Vietnam  Mai Cam Binh 1   , Tran Nha Ghi 1*   , Nguyen Ngoc Hien 1   , Nguyen Thi Trang Nhung 1   , Pham Hoang Bao Ngoc 1  1 Faculty of Business Administration, Industrial University of Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam,  e-mail:   maicambinh2002@gmail.com ,   trannhaghi@iuh.edu.vn ,   nguyenngochien@iuh.edu.vn ,  trangnhunghk2002@gmail.com ,   nguyettieungoc2002@gmail.com  Abstract:   The increasing number of students intending to drop out of universities in Vietnam has raised concerns. While  previous studies have addressed factors influencing dropout intentions, several aspects still need to be explored, particularly  in developing countries like Vietnam. This research provides an overview of the factors influencing students’ dropout intention  in Ho Chi Minh City. The study employs the Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) approach with a  survey sample of 804 students from universities in Ho Chi Minh City. The research findings reveal that factors such as Lack of  university commitment (LUC), degree and course commitment (DCC), ineffective time management (ITM), curriculum design  (CD), Ineffective adaptation to learning environment (IALE), low classroom participation (LCP) and personal circumstances  (PC) significantly influence students’ dropout intentions. Additionally, factors including skills and attitudes of instructors (SAI),  instructor support (IS), positive instructor feedback (PIF), university facilities (UF), cultural and social environment (CSE), and  access to support from academic advisors (ASA) do not show statistically significant relationships with students’ dropout intention.  Furthermore, the study finds no significant differences in dropout intention based on gender, area, and type of university, except  for ASA has a differential impact on students’ dropout intentions based on the type of university. The research results provide  valuable insights for researchers and educational experts to understand better the factors contributing to students’ dropout  intentions. Moreover, the findings assist educational managers and instructors in developing appropriate support measures  and interventions to enhance student engagement throughout their academic journey. Finally, the study discusses limitations  and suggests future research directions.  Keywords: Dropout intentions, higher education, Ho Chi Minh City.  Original scientific paper  Received: September 05, 2023.  Revised: October 30, 2023.  Accepted: November 05, 2023.  UDC:  159.947.5.072-057.875(597  10.23947/2334-8496-2023-11-3-417-437  © 2023 by the authors. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the  Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).  * Corresponding author:   trannhaghi@iuh.edu.vn

Page 2:
www.ijcrsee.com  418 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  Minh City University of Industry and Trade has over 2,500 students with long-standing tuition fee debts,  putting them at risk of being banned from taking final exams. The University of Sciences - Vietnam National  University Ho Chi Minh City has decided to expel 454 students and issue academic warnings to another  605 individuals. Statistical data demonstrates an increasing trend of student dropouts in Vietnamese  universities, highlighting the urgent need for measures to mitigate this issue.  Several studies have focused on the factors influencing students’ intention to drop out before  completing their university education.   Orion, Forosuelo, and Cavalida (2014)   found that factors influencing  students’ dropout intentions include school policies and practices, financial resources, academic  performance, and teaching programs.   Willcoxson (2010)   concluded that the factors influencing dropout  intentions differ among students in the first, second, and third years of university.   Farr-Wharton et al.  (2018)   demonstrated the impact of lecturer-student exchange (student-LMX) on engagement, course  satisfaction, achievement, and intention to leave university among 363 students in an Australian university.  Schnettler et al. (2020)   indicated that costs, age, and difficulties in the learning process tend to make  students more likely to drop out.   Lundquist, Spalding, and Landru (2002)   concluded that females are more  prone to dropping out than males, and factors such as lack of faculty support, unresponsive faculty to  phone/email inquiries, and complicated faculty-student interactions increase students’ inclination to leave  the university.   Bakker et al. (2021)   found that supervisor and co-worker support are negatively related  to the intention to leave among nursing students. During the Covid-19 pandemic, several studies have  explored the factors influencing students’ dropout intentions.   Chi, Randall, and Hill (2021)   showed that  the COVID-19 pandemic affects students’ mental health and dropout intentions, with those experiencing  anxiety or depression symptoms and burnout being more likely to consider dropping out compared to  those without mental health issues.   Mtshweni (2021)   investigated the factors influencing the intention  to drop 955 students from a university in South Africa, including social adjustment, personal-emotional  adjustment, institutional attachment, and socioeconomic status.   Baalmann et al. (2022)   demonstrated  that parental educational aspirations, students living in partnerships, and close friends have an impact  on students’ dropout intentions among a sample of 7,169 students in a German university.   Matteau et al.  (2023)   revealed that excessive commitments and conflicts between work, study, and personal life are  associated with higher levels of psychological stress and the intention to leave university.  The literature review shows that research on students’ dropout intentions has received significant  attention from scholars worldwide. The factors influencing students’ dropout intentions are diverse and  depend on each country’s timeframe and organizational cultural characteristics. Some factors influencing  dropout intentions mentioned by   Willcoxson (2010)   are general, comprehensive, specific, and relevant to  the Vietnamese context. However,   Willcoxson (2010)   examined the differences in factors affecting dropout  intentions across semesters and among first-, second-, and third-year students but needed to determine  the impact level of each factor on students’ dropout intentions. Moreover, the factors mentioned, such as  commitment to the institution, degree/course commitment, time management, teaching skills and attitudes  of instructors, accessibility and support from instructors, course design, feedback, ineffective adaptation  to the learning environment, class participation, infrastructure, socio-cultural environment, accessibility  and support from counseling, and personal circumstances that align with the context and culture of first,  second, and third-year students in Vietnamese universities.  This research aims to provide an overview of the factors influencing students’ dropout intentions  in universities within Ho Chi Minh City. While many studies have identified a range of factors that may  contribute to students’ dropout intentions, there still needs to be clear validation regarding the level of  impact of each factor. Therefore, the contribution of this study is to clarify the degree of influence of  these factors on students’ dropout intentions in universities within Ho Chi Minh City, where extensive  validation studies still need to be completed. This research utilizes a non-probability and convenient  sampling method to collect data from the survey participants easily. The study’s geographical scope is  limited to the inner city and suburban areas of Ho Chi Minh City. The research has two main objectives:  1) identifying the factors influencing students’ dropout intentions within the Ho Chi Minh City area, and 2)  proposing managerial implications to improve these factors to reduce students’ dropout intentions within  the Ho Chi Minh City area.  Definition of dropout intentions  According to,   Pijl, Frostad, and Mjaavatn (2014) , early dropout refers to needing to complete an  educational program or complete it with significant delays. Additionally,   Schwab (2018)   suggests that  when individuals intend to leave school, they quickly focus on the desire to discontinue their education.  Therefore, dropout is considered the final step in intending to leave school before early dropout occurs.  According to,   Gury (2011) , dropout occurs when students discontinue their studies without intending to

Page 3:
www.ijcrsee.com  419 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  continue in the initially registered field of study or the institution they attend.   Fitzpatrick and Yoels (1992) ,  define dropout as students who leave an educational institution without completing their program within  the next four years, regardless of whether they return to school later and graduate. Furthermore, dropout  can refer to individuals participating in a school course who do not wish to complete the high school  program within five years ( Pijl, Frostad, and Mjaavatn (2014) ).  Based on the definitions provided above, the dropout intentions can be defined as not completing  an educational program or completing it with significant delays, not continuing in the initially registered  field of study or institution, leaving school without graduating within a specific timeframe, or not wanting to  complete the academic program within a certain period.  Research hypothesis development  Students have various reasons for choosing to attend a university, including personal purposes  such as academic pursuit, proximity to their residence, reputation, quality of education, and the quality of  facilities at the institution. Based on their criteria, students can evaluate suitable universities and select a  school that meets their conditions. The choice of university has a specific impact on students’ subsequent  intention to drop out, especially in cases where students do not gain admission to their desired university  and must attend an alternative institution.   Willcoxson (2010)   also indicates that students are more  likely to leave university when they lack organizational commitment and receive insufficient guidance  regarding enrollment choices. This situation commonly occurs among first-year students. From the  research findings,   Willcoxson (2010)   determines that when students fail to gain admission to their desired  university, the likelihood of them forming an intention to drop out increases significantly. Furthermore,  during their studies at the alternative university, students still hope to gain admission to their initial desired  university and attend the substitute university as a stepping stone to transfer to another university, thereby  increasing their intention to drop out ( Willcoxson, 2010) .   Bean (1980)   analyzed a model contributing to  student dropout and found a correlation between student commitment and the intention to drop out. This  study demonstrates that students need more commitment to the institution to increase their intention to  drop out and continue their educational journey.  H1: The lack of university commitment positively impacts student’s dropout intentions in Ho Chi  Minh City.  MacKie (2001)   demonstrates that students who engage in courses over multiple years face similar  difficulties as those who have dropped out before completing their studies. However, the remaining people  exhibit more substantial commitment and attachment to the institution. Students who stay in school are  more likely to overcome challenges than those who have dropped out ( Nieudwoudt and Pedler, 2021 ).  Students with explicit purposes for pursuing a specific field of study are more likely to intend to enroll in that  particular academic program at the university.   Yorke and Longden (2008)   indicate that strong academic  commitment is associated with stability and persistence in students’ studies, while weak commitment may  lead to an intention to drop out.   Tinto (2012)   also suggests that solid academic commitment positively  impacts students’ continued engagement in learning activities and reduces the likelihood of dropping out.  Therefore, universities with a clear commitment to degree programs and the career-related benefits they  offer, aligning with students’ prospects, enhance students’ commitment and attachment to the university.  H2: Degree and course commitment negatively impact student’s dropout intentions in Ho Chi Minh  City  Swick (1987)   argues that many students perceive the academic process as highly stressful. Time  management is a university counseling service ( Macan and Shahani, 1990 ). Students also need help  to allocate their time effectively and balance it with work and personal life ( Burke et al., 2017 ). Time is  a significant factor influencing students’ daily lives. When time management skills are weak, such as  inadequate time allocation or last-minute cramming for exams, it is discussed as a cause of stress and a  decline in academic performance ( Longman and Atkinson, 1988 ). The issues mentioned above occurring  consistently over an extended period can discourage students, resulting in a gradual formation of the  intention to drop out ( Nieudwoudt and Pedler, 2021 ). Students struggling to balance their personal time  and study time at the university and those struggling with effective time management are more likely to  have an increased intention to drop out ( Willcoxson, 2010 ).

Page 4:
www.ijcrsee.com  420 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  H3: Ineffective time management positively impacts as students’ dropout intentions in Ho Chi Minh  City.  Willcoxson (2010)   found that reducing students’ intention to drop out is related to building trust,  fostering learning expectations, improving teaching quality, providing support, and creating a vibrant  learning environment and social activities. Additionally, the emerging tendency of students to consider  dropping out is also linked to the teaching skills and attitudes of the faculty. Students perceive enthusiastic  support from instructors, a sense of closeness, provision of comprehensive learning materials, and timely  and positive feedback as factors that reduce their intention to drop out ( Willcoxson, 2010 ). Social support,  learning experiences, and an engaging learning environment, along with institutional support, are factors  that influence students’ decision to remain in school ( Nieudwoudt and Pedler, 2021 ). Poor interaction or  communication with instructors and mentors can lead to students’ intention to drop out ( Nieudwoudt and  Pedler, 2021 ).  H4: Skills and attitudes of instructors negatively impact student’s dropout intentions in Ho Chi Minh  City.  Glogowska, Young, and Lockyer (2007)   demonstrate that students’ determination, career  commitment, social support, and student services provided by the university contribute to student retention.  Natoli, Jackling, and Siddique (2015)   conclude that student support services offered by the university  are an essential factor in influencing students’ intention to stay in school. The institution’s provision of  facilities, faculty, programs of study, student support services, and engagement in academic activities all  contribute to student retention ( Kuh et al., 2007 ). Instructor members who are willing to address students’  concerns and understand their difficulties in learning create enthusiasm for studying and reduce students’  thoughts of dropping out.  H5: Instructor support negatively impacts student’s dropout intentions in Ho Chi Minh City.  Willcoxson (2010)   argues that carefully designed and logically structured courses with reliable  information yield high educational effectiveness. Instructors who incorporate real-life examples in their  lectures help students quickly understand and apply the subject to practical work situations ( Willcoxson,  2010 ). Furthermore, university support for students to engage in experiential learning and work  opportunities in companies enhances their knowledge and skills, reducing their intention to drop out.  A flexible curriculum can make students feel more comfortable dropping out.   Rovai and Jordan (2004)  have demonstrated that program flexibility can increase students’ commitment and intention to continue  their studies.   Bransford (2000)   emphasizes the importance of applying knowledge to real-life situations,  connecting knowledge with reality, and applying it in daily life to help students recognize the value of  learning and enhance their commitment to education.  H6: The curriculum design negatively impacts students’ intention to drop out in Ho Chi Minh City.  Case (2007)   demonstrates that feedback is crucial in promoting student improvement by addressing  errors, lessons’ shortcomings, and areas needing improvement. Faculty support has a positive impact  on academic performance and student engagement. If instructors fail to meet students’ expectations or  requirements, harmful or ineffective feedback can lead to disappointment and strengthen the intention to  drop out ( Hausmann, Schofield and Woods, 2007 ).  H7: Positive instructor feedback negatively impacts students’ dropout intentions in Ho Chi Minh  City.  When participating in courses at school, students may encounter difficulties in comprehending  knowledge, struggle to adapt and keep up with the teaching methods of instructors, find it challenging  to understand specialized materials and feel overwhelmed by the workload. These factors can lead to  student frustration, a lack of self-belief in their ability to perform well in the courses, decreased motivation  to study, and an increased intention to drop out ( Willcoxson, 2010 ).   Eccles and Wigfield (2002)   suggest that  students’ positive adaptation to the learning environment often leads to a more substantial commitment  to the learning process and a higher likelihood of sustaining their studies and completing the courses.  Effective adaptation can help students reduce stress and pressure in the learning process, which can

Page 5:
www.ijcrsee.com  421 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  contribute to the intention to drop out ( Eisenberg et al., 2007 ).   Kember, Biggs and Leung (2004)   have  demonstrated the relationship between adaptation to the learning environment and students’ academic  performance, showing that well-adapted students tend to have higher grades, more stable academic  performance, and maintain their intention to study throughout the program.  H8: Ineffective adaptation to the learning environment positively impacts students’ dropout intentions  in Ho Chi Minh City.  According to empirical research surveys, many students who drop out initially show commitment  but fail to follow through ( MacKie, 2001 ). Regular class truancy and non-participation positively correlate  to dropout ( Willcoxson, 2010 ). Classroom engagement often provides valuable learning opportunities.  When students participate or participate minimally, they may take advantage of opportunities to  understand and acquire the necessary knowledge to achieve better results in assessments ( Pascarella  and Terenzini, 1991 ).   Kuh et al. (2008)   have shown that classroom engagement is often correlated with  academic performance, with lower levels of engagement resulting in poorer academic outcomes and  higher intentions to drop out. Classroom engagement reflects the commitment to the learning process.  Students who participate less in class may need more commitment and determination to complete the  course ( Feldman, 1994 ).  H9: Low classroom participation positively impacts students’ dropout intentions in Ho Chi Minh City.  Good facilities create a conducive and comfortable learning environment that caters to the needs of  students and minimizes the likelihood of students intending to drop out. Good facilities influence student  satisfaction, impact student confidence ( Omar et al., 2009 ), and shape future planning intentions ( Clemes,  Gan and Kao, 2008 ).   Reynolds (2007)   analyzed the correlation between facilities and student recruitment  and retention. Classrooms that provide a high-quality learning environment, spacious and well-ventilated  libraries with diverse resources to support learning, and an information technology system that meets  students’ usage needs have a reverse correlation with students’ intention to drop out ( Willcoxson, 2010 ).  H10: The university facilities negatively impact students’ dropout intentions in Ho Chi Minh City.  The cultural and social environment significantly influences students’ dropping out. Students may  feel helpless, isolated, and unwilling to continue their education when this environment is not friendly.  Conversely, when positive relationships characterize the environment, students will receive support and  encouragement to continue their studies. Research has shown that the cultural and social environment  impacts student satisfaction ( Kahu, 2013 ). According to   Willcoxson (2010) , minimizing student dropout  requires providing facilities that meet social needs and are compatible with students’ religious/cultural  requirements.  H11: The cultural and social environment negatively impacts students’ intention to drop out in Ho  Chi Minh City.  Access to information and support from academic advisors increases student retention ( Crosling,  Thomas and Heagney, 2009 ). Student retention depends not only on individual factors such as motivation  and academic achievement but also on external factors such as access to support and resources ( Cabrera  et al., 2006 ). Access to information, guidance, and counseling from academic advisors and classmates, as  well as academic and social support services, can be crucial in the decision to continue or withdraw from  university ( Tinto and Pusser, 2006 ). Students with access to high-quality support services are more likely  to be motivated and have higher retention rates ( Tinto and Pusser, 2006 ). Students receiving good advice  from advisors regarding career choices or quickly receiving assistance when needed have a reverse  correlation with their intention to drop out ( Willcoxson, 2010 ).  H12: Access to support from academic advisors negatively impact students’ dropout intentions in  Ho Chi Minh City.  Students who face financial difficulties often spend more time working than studying ( Peltz et al.,  2021 ). Financial difficulties negatively impact students’ commitment to their studies ( Willcoxson, 2010 ).  Studies have found that students with high intentions to drop out often face financial hardships and work

Page 9:
www.ijcrsee.com  425 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  Scale evaluation: In the PLS-SEM method, the outer loadings criterion is used to evaluate the  importance of predictor variables in the model. According to   Henseler, Ringle and Sinkovics (2009) , factor  loadings > 0.5 are considered. Factor loadings below 0.5 will be excluded from the measurement scale  in the model.  Table 3  Scale reliability  Table 3 presents the reliability testing results, including Cronbach’s Alpha, Composite Reliability  (CR), and Average Variance Extracted (AVE) for the measurement scales in the model. The statistical  table shows that the Cronbach’s alpha values of the measurement scales are all above 0.7, ensuring  reliability for use ( Nunnally, 1978 ). Therefore, the variables will be retained and utilized in the subsequent  steps.   Hair et al. (2019) , state that a Composite Reliability (CR) value greater than 0.7 ensures reliability.  Based on the results in Table 3, all measurement scales have CR values above 0.6, except for the LCP,  IS, ALE and LUC scales. Lastly, the Average Variance Extracted (AVE) for all measurement scales is  more significant than 0.5, ensuring reliability ( Hair et al., 2019 ). Hence, most measurement scales in the  research model demonstrate satisfactory reliability.  Table 4  Scale statistical value  Items   Mean   SD   Factor loadings  Student’s   dropout   inten -  tions (SDI)  SDI1:   I   often   think   about  dropping out of school.   2.065   1.208   0.75  SDI2: I am actively seeking  job opportunities and alter -  native learning options, so I  may leave the university.  2.044   1.123   0.815  SDI3: There is a possibility  that I will drop out of univer -  sity within the next year.   2.061   1.268   0.749  SDI4: I am looking for suit -  able timing to drop out of  school.   1.769   1.092   0.857  Lack of university commit -  ment (LUC)

Page 12:
www.ijcrsee.com  428 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  ASA1: I receive good advice  from the university regarding  career choices.   3.397   0.995   0.893  ASA2: I receive good advice  from a career counselor in  choosing   a   profession   for  myself.  3.387   1.045   0.907  ASA3: I receive good advice  from the university regarding  career choices.   3.429   1.03   0.92  ASA4: I easily receive assis -  tance when needed from the  management team.   3.435   0.999   0.842  ASA5:   The   management  team is always ready to as -  sist when I need them.   3.427   1.019   0.754  Personal   circumstances  (PC)  PC1: I worry about my men -  tal health.   3.075   1.21   0.82  PC2: I worry about my physi -  cal health.   3.039   1.202   0.821  PC3: I often feel homesick.   3.213   1.309   0.584  PC4: I worry about the accu -  mulating debt while studying  at university.   2.976   1.393   0.774  PC5: I have financial issues.   3.06   1.351   0.742  (Source: own author)  Table 4 presents the descriptive statistics, standard deviations, and factor loadings of the variables  after variable elimination. The results show that all factor loadings are greater than 0.7, except for SAI5  and PC3, but they are retained to ensure content validity. The measurement scales used in the research  model exhibit convergence.  Table 5  The discriminant validity testing  (Source: own author)  Table 5 presents the discriminant validity test results for the model’s latent variables using the  criteria set by   Fornell and Larcker (1981) . The table shows that all square root of the average variance  extracted (AVE) values for each research variable are more significant than the correlation coefficients  between that variable and the remaining variables in the model. Therefore, the measurement scales for  the research variables all demonstrate discriminant validity.

Page 15:
www.ijcrsee.com  431 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  (Source: own author)  Table 7 presents the results of a multigroup analysis examining the differences in students’ intention  to drop out of school based on three variables: gender (Male, Female), location of activity (Urban,  Suburban), and type of university (Public, Private). The results of the statistical tests indicate that the  p-values are all greater than 0.05, suggesting that there is no significant difference in students’ intention  to drop out of school based on gender, location of activity, or type of university, except for ASA - SDI, the  access to support from academic advisors (ASA) has a differential impact on students’ dropout intentions  based on the type of university (p = 0.023 < 0.05).  Discussion  The research findings indicate a higher intention to drop out among students who need more  commitment to the institution, particularly in Ho Chi Minh City. These findings are consistent with previous  studies such as   Willcoxson (2010) ,   Bean (1980) .   Willcoxson (2010)   identified that students are likelier to  leave university when they lack organizational commitment.   Bean (1980)   found that students who lack  commitment to the institution tend to withdraw from the learning process.  The commitment to credentials and courses inversely impacts students’ intention to drop out.  Previous studies such as   Yorke and Longden (2008) ,   Tinto (2012)   have shown that strong commitment  to academic qualifications and courses is associated with stability and persistence in students’ learning,  reducing the likelihood of dropouts.  In addition, ineffective time management positively impacts students’ intention to drop out in  Ho Chi Minh City. The research findings are consistent with previous studies such as   Nieudwoudt and  Pedler (2021) ,   Willcoxson (2010) . Ineffective time management leads to student discouragement and the  formation of dropout intentions ( Nieudwoudt and Pedler, 2021 ). Students who are unable to balance their  personal time and study time are more likely to develop intentions to drop out ( Willcoxson, 2010 ).  The design of the course program has an inverse impact on students’ intention to drop out. The  research findings align with previous studies as well.   Rovai and Jordan (2004)   demonstrated that flexibility  in the curriculum can increase student commitment and reduce dropout intentions.   Willcoxson (2010)  stated that carefully designed and logical courses can be highly effective in education and contribute to  reducing students’ intention to drop out.  Low classroom participation by students has a positive impact on their intention to drop out. Some  previous studies have also shown that students who frequently skip classes and do not participate in  classroom activities have a positive relationship with dropout intentions ( Willcoxson, 2010 ).   Kuh et al.  (2008)   argued that low-engagement students have poorer academic outcomes and higher intentions  to drop out. Students with low classroom participation need more determination to complete the course  ( Feldman, 1994 ). Lastly, personal circumstances positively impact students’ intention to drop out in Ho  Chi Minh City, which is consistent with previous research. Personal circumstances influence students’

Page 16:
www.ijcrsee.com  432 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  decisions to drop out ( Bean, 1980 ;   Willcoxson, 2010 ).  The remaining factors, such as instructors’ teaching skills and attitude, instructor support, instructor  feedback, facilities, socio-cultural environment, and access to academic advisors, do not impact students’  intention to drop out. These research findings contradict previous studies ( Hausmann et al., 2007 ;   Kuh  et al., 2007 ;   Nieudwoudt and Pedler, 2021 ;   Willcoxson, 2010 ). When interviewing a group of students in  various institutions, they expressed the belief that instructors’ teaching skills and attitude do not influence  their intention to drop out. According to the interviewed student group, effective instruction requires  instructors to have practical experience, expertise, and in-depth knowledge. Students are concerned  with teaching methods and the enthusiasm and dedication of instructors. Instructor support helps  students effectively address difficulties during the learning process. However, access to and support from  instructors is just one aspect, and if timely support from instructors is not received, students can seek  assistance from friends to resolve their issues. Whether students receive access to and support from  instructors does not impact their intention to drop out. The research results indicate that factors such  as timely feedback, facilities, socio-cultural environment, and access to academic advisors positively  but statistically insignificantly influence students’ intention to drop out. The research findings may not  be suitable for the actual situation in Vietnam and cannot be considered as factors affecting students’  intention to drop out.  Conclusion  Based on the practical context in Vietnam regarding students’ dropout rate and considering the  research by   Willcoxson (2010) , the study adjusted and identified factors influencing students’ intention  to drop out in Ho Chi Minh City. The influencing factors were explored by surveying 804 students from  public and private universities in suburban and urban areas. These factors include: 1) Lack of commitment  to the institution, 2) Degree/course commitment, 3) Time management, 4) Course design, 5) Students’  ineffective adaptation to the learning environment, 6) Limited classroom participation, and 7) Personal  circumstances. Additionally, the study found that the following factors did not impact students’ intention  to drop out in Ho Chi Minh City: Teaching skills and attitude of instructors, instructor support, instructor  feedback, facilities, socio-cultural environment, and access to academic advisors. Based on the findings,  the research made two main contributions.  In terms of theoretical aspects, the research has identified factors that influence students’ intention  to drop out in Vietnam, specifically in Ho Chi Minh City, where previous studies were scarce. These factors  align with the practical situation for Ho Chi Minh City students. The study provides a comprehensive  understanding of the factors influencing students’ intention to drop out. This helps researchers and  educational experts better understand the factors that may lead to student disengagement or loss of  interest in learning. Factors such as lack of commitment to the institution, degree/course commitment,  time management, course design, ineffective adaptation to the learning environment, and personal  circumstances have been identified to assess students’ intention to drop out. This can assist educational  managers and instructors develop appropriate support measures and interventions to maintain and  enhance students’ engagement and academic success.  In practical terms, the research findings can be used to develop programs and educational policies  to reduce the student dropout rate. Universities and instructors can implement measures such as  enhancing student commitment, creating conducive learning environments, improving time management,  and offering better-designed courses to enhance student engagement and interest in learning. The  specific results from the study can also be used to propose individual support measures for students. This  may involve counseling and personal support to help students overcome personal and familial difficulties  caused by their circumstances. The research also highlights that factor such as teaching skills and attitude  of instructors, instructor support, and academic advising are not decisive factors in students’ intention to  drop out in Ho Chi Minh City. This can help universities focus on other aspects of the learning experience  to create a positive learning environment and better support students.  The study is limited to the research scope within the urban and suburban areas of Ho Chi Minh  City. Therefore, expanding the research scope to include universities in other regions of Vietnam may  be necessary to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the issue. Additionally, the study needs to  address the financial factors and cost of education. Surveying the impact of financial factors and the cost  of education could be an essential part of understanding students’ intention to drop out.

Page 19:
www.ijcrsee.com  435 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  Schwab, S. (2018). Attitudes Towards Inclusive Schooling: A study on Students’, Teachers’ and Parents’ attitudes. I nternational  Journal of Inclusive Education 27 (2), 221-240.   https://doi.org/10.1080/13603116.2020.1837267  Sheldon, S. B., & Epstein, J. L. (2004). Getting Students to School: Using Family and Community Involvement to Reduce  Chronic Absenteeism.   The School Community Journal, 14 (2), 39-56.   https://doi.org/10.26530/OAPEN_389225  Shiau, W.-L., Sarstedt, M., & Hair, J. F. (2019). Internet research using partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-  SEM).   Internet Research, 29 (3), 398-406.   https://doi.org/10.1108/IntR-10-2018-0447  Swick, K. J. (1987).   Student Stress: A Classroom Management System . Analysis and Action Series. In.   https://eric.  ed.gov/?id=ED307514  Tinto, V. (2012).   Leaving college: Rethinking the causes and cures of student attrition . In.   https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED371658  Tinto, V., & Pusser, B. (2006). Moving from theory to action: Building a model of institutional action for student success.  National Postsecondary Education Cooperative, 1 (51), 89-125.   https://www.researchgate.net/publication/251378009_  Moving_From_Theory_to_Action_Building_a_Model_of_Institutional_Action_for_Student_Success  Willcoxson, L. (2010). Factors affecting intention to leave in the first, second and third year of university studies: a semester-  by-semester investigation.   Higher Education Research & Development, 29 (6), 623-639.   https://doi.org/10.1080/0729  4360.2010.501071  Yorke, M., & Longden, B. (2008).   The first-year experience of higher education in the UK .   https://www.researchgate.net/  publication/225083945_The_First-Year_Experience_of_Higher_Education_in_the_UK_-_Final_Report  Appendix  Items  Student’s dropout intentions (SDI)  SDI1: I often think about dropping out of school.  SDI2: I am actively seeking job opportunities and alternative learning options, so I may  leave the university.  SDI3: There is a possibility that I will drop out of university within the next year.  SDI4: I am looking for suitable timing to drop out of school.  Lack of university commitment (LUC)  LUC1: I am studying at this university as a steppingstone to transfer to another univer -  sity.  LUC2: The reputation of my university is very important for job applications.  LUC3: I am attending this university because I did not meet the requirements of other  preferences.  LUC4: I am satisfied with the university I am currently studying at.  LUC5: I am satisfied with my personal experience at the university.  Degree and course commitment (DCC)  DCC1: I have obvious reasons for studying at this university.  DCC2: I can enroll in the course/program that I have chosen.  DCC3: I know what profession I want to pursue in the future.  Ineffective time management (ITM)  ITM1: It is difficult to balance personal time and study time at the university.  ITM2: I struggle with managing study time effectively.  ITM3: It is challenging to balance family responsibilities and university studies.  ITM4: It is challenging to balance work and university studies.  Skills and attitudes of instructors (SAI)  SAI1: The professors are enthusiastic and dedicated in their teaching.  SAI2: The professors are skilled at explaining things.  SAI3: The professors always strive to make the classes interesting.

Page 10:
www.ijcrsee.com  426 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  LUC1: I am studying at this  university as a steppingstone  to transfer to another univer -  sity.  1.924   1.138   0.922  LUC3: I am attending this  university because I did not  meet   the   requirements   of  other preferences.  2.897   1.431   0.577  Degree and course com -  mitment (DCC)  DCC1: I have obvious rea -  sons for studying at this uni -  versity.   3.596   1.098   0.867  DCC2: I can enroll in the  course/program that I have  chosen.   3.799   0.969   0.856  DCC3: I know what profes -  sion I want to pursue in the  future.   3.506   1.138   0.807  Ineffective   time   manage -  ment (ITM)  ITM1: It is difficult to balance  personal time and study time  at the university.   3.073   1.119   0.798  ITM2: I struggle with manag -  ing study time effectively.   3.163   1.159   0.796  ITM3: It is challenging to bal -  ance   family   responsibilities  and university studies.   2.667   1.18   0.848  ITM4:   It   is   challenging   to  balance work and university  studies.   2.846   1.221   0.803  Skills and attitudes of in -  structors (SAI)  SAI1: The professors are en -  thusiastic and dedicated in  their teaching.   3.9   0.981   0.906  SAI2:   The   professors   are  skilled at explaining things.   3.755   0.977   0.887  SAI3: The professors always  strive to make the classes in -  teresting.   3.795   0.986   0.865  SAI4: The faculty team clear -  ly   communicates   their   ex -  pectations from the students  right from the beginning.  3.841   0.991   0.818  SAI5: The professors always  create a sense of closeness  with the students.   3.749   1.43   0.62  Instructor support (IS)  IS4: The faculty team is al -  ways available when I need  them.   3.68   1.699   0.768  IS5: My professors genuinely  make an effort to understand  the difficulties students face  in their learning process.  3.641   0.974   0.9  Curriculum design (CD)

Page 11:
www.ijcrsee.com  427 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  CD1: My professors incorpo -  rate real-life examples into  their teaching curriculum.   3.851   0.92   0.856  CD2: What I am learning at  the university has been re -  searched and proven.   3.745   0.919   0.889  CD3: I am satisfied with the  job experiential opportunities  introduced by the university.   3.582   0.993   0.807  Positive   instructor   feed -  back (PIF)  PIF1: I received helpful feed -  back   on   the   assessment  tasks.   3.519   0.923   0.964  PIF2: I received prompt feed -  back on the tasks.   3.437   0.954   0.891  Ineffective   adaptation  to   learning   environment  (IALE)  IALE2: My study program is  too demanding.   3.085   0.969   0.793  IALE4: I find it difficult to un -  derstand various study mate -  rials.   3.345   0.995   0.693  IALE5: I struggle to adapt to  the teaching methods at the  university.   2.988   1.064   0.841  Low classroom participation  (LCP)  LCP7: I frequently skip class -  es.   2.311   1.309   0.882  LCP8: I don't attend classes  because the study materials  are available on the website.   2.567   1.208   0.847  University facilities (UF)  UF1: The classrooms pro -  vide a high-quality learning  environment.   3.624   1.004   0.846  UF2: The library is spacious,  well-ventilated, and offers a  diverse range of study ma -  terials.  3.827   0.97   0.876  UF3: The information tech -  nology system meets my us -  age needs.   3.562   1.035   0.859  UF4:   The   classrooms   are  very spacious.   3.586   1.012   0.817  Cultural and social envi -  ronment (CSE)  CSE1: The facilities of the  university   meet   my   social  needs.   3.545   1.023   0.937  CSE2: The facilities of the  university are suitable for my  religious/cultural needs.   3.585   0.98   0.952  Access   to   support   from  academic advisors (ASA)

Page 17:
www.ijcrsee.com  433 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  Acknowledgements  This study is the outcome of a university-level project (Grant number: 22/2QTKDSV01) and was  supported by funding from the Industrial University of Ho Chi Minh City.  Conflict of interests  The authors declare no conflict of interest.  Author Contributions  Conceptualization, M.C.B, N.T.T.N and P.H.B.N; methodology, T.N.G.; software, T.N.G.; formal  analysis, T.N.G. and N.N.H; writing—original draft preparation, T.N.G. and N.N.H.; writing—review and  editing, T.N.G. and N.N.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.  References  Baalmann, T., Brömmelhaus, A., Hülsemann, J., Feldhaus, M., & Speck, K. (2022). The Impact of Parents, Intimate  Relationships, and Friends on Students’ Dropout Intentions.   Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory  & Practice,   15210251221133374.   https://doi.org/10.1177/15210251221133374  Bakker, E. J. M., Roelofs, P. D. D. M., Kox, J. H. A. M., Miedema, H. S., Francke, A. L., van der Beek, A. J., & Boot, C. R. L.  (2021). Psychosocial work characteristics associated with distress and intention to leave nursing education among  students; A one-year follow-up study.   Nurse Education Today,   101, 104853.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2021.104853  Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.   Psychological Review, 84 (2), 191–215.  https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.84.2.191  Bean, J. P. (1980). Dropouts and turnover: The synthesis and test of a causal model of student attrition.   Research in Higher  Education, 12 (2), 155-187.   https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00976194  Bransford, J. (2000).   How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience , and School: Expanded Edition (2000). Retrieved from   https://  nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/9853/how-people-learn-brain-mind-experience-and-school-expanded-edition  Burke, P. J., Bennett, A., Bunn, M., Stevenson, J., & Clegg, S. (2017).   It’s about time: Working towards more equitable  understandings of the impact of time for students in higher education . Retrieved from   https://www.ncsehe.edu.au/  publications/its-about-time-working-towards-more-equitable-understandings-of-the-impact-of-time-for-students-in-  higher-education/  Cabrera, A. F., Deil-Amen, R., Prabhu, R., Terenzini, P. T., Lee, C., & Franklin, J. R. E. (2006). Increasing the College Preparedness  of At-Risk Students.   Journal of Latinos and Education, 5 (2), 79-97.   https://doi.org/10.1207/s1532771xjle0502_2  Case, S. (2007). Reconfiguring and realigning the assessment feedback processes for an undergraduate criminology degree.  Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 32 (3), 285-299.   https://doi.org/10.1080/02602930600896548  Chi, D. L., Randall, C. L., & Hill, C. M. (2021). Dental trainees’ mental health and intention to leave their programs during  the COVID-19 pandemic.   The Journal of the American Dental Association, 152 (7), 526-534.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  adaj.2021.02.012  Clemes, M. D., Gan, C. E. C., & Kao, T.-H. (2008). University Student Satisfaction: An Empirical Analysis.   Journal of Marketing  for Higher Education, 17 (2), 292-325.   https://doi.org/10.1080/08841240801912831  Cohen, J. (2013).   Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . In.   https://doi.org/10.1016/C2013-0-10517-X  Crosling, G., Thomas, L., & Heagney, M. (2009). Introduction: Student success and retention.   Improving student retention  in   higher   education,   19-32.   https://www.researchgate.net/publication/244990185_Crosling_G_Heagney_M_and_  Thomas_L_2009_Improving_Student_Retention_in_Higher_Education_Improving_teaching_and_learning_In_  Australian_Universities’_Review_Vol51_No_2  Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and goals.   Annual review of psychology, 53 (1), 109-132.  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135153  Eisenberg, D., Gollust, S. E., Golberstein, E., & Hefner, J. L. (2007). Prevalence and correlates of depression, anxiety, and  suicidality among university students.   American journal of orthopsychiatry, 77 (4), 534-542.   https://doi.org/10.1037/0002-  9432.77.4.534  Farr-Wharton, B., Charles, M. B., Keast, R., Woolcott, G., & Chamberlain, D. (2018). Why lecturers still matter: the impact of  lecturer-student exchange on student engagement and intention to leave university prematurely.   Higher Education, 75 ,  167-185.   https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-017-0190-5  Feldman, K. A. (1994). [What Matters in College? Four Critical Years Revisited., Alexander W. Astin].   The Journal of Higher  Education, 65 (5), 615-622.   https://doi.org/10.2307/2943781  Fitzpatrick, K. M., & Yoels, W. C. (1992). Policy, School Structure, and Sociodemographic Effects on Statewide High School  Dropout Rates.   Sociology of Education, 65 (1), 76-93.   https://doi.org/10.2307/2112694  Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables and Measurement  Error.   Journal of Marketing Research, 18 (1), 39-50.   https://doi.org/10.1177/002224378101800104  Glogowska, M., Young, P., & Lockyer, L. (2007). Should I go or should I stay?: A study of factors influencing students’ decisions  on early leaving.   Active Learning in Higher Education, 8 (1), 63-77.   https://doi.org/10.1177/1469787407074115  Gury, N. (2011). Dropping out of higher education in France: a micro-economic approach using survival analysis.   Education  Economics, 19 (1), 51-64.   https://doi.org/10.1080/09645290902796357  Hair, J. F., Risher, J. J., Sarstedt, M., & Ringle, C. M. (2019). When to use and how to report the results of PLS-SEM.   European

Page 18:
www.ijcrsee.com  434 Mai Cam Binh et al. (2023). Factors Influencing Students’ Dropout Intention in Ho Chi Minh City,   International Journal of  Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education (IJCRSEE), 11 (3), 417-437 .  Business Review, 31 (1), 2-24.   https://doi.org/10.1108/EBR-11-2018-0203  Hair Jr, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. (2009).   Multivariate Data Analysis . In. Retrieved from   https://www.  drnishikantjha.com/papersCollection/Multivariate%20Data%20Analysis.pdf  Hausmann, L. R. M., Schofield, J. W., & Woods, R. L. (2007). Sense of Belonging as a Predictor of Intentions to Persist Among  African American and White First-Year College Students.   Research in Higher Education, 48 (7), 803-839.   https://doi.  org/10.1007/s11162-007-9052-9  Henseler, J., & Chin, W. W. (2010). A Comparison of Approaches for the Analysis of Interaction Effects Between Latent  Variables Using Partial Least Squares Path Modeling.   Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 17 (1),  82-109.   https://doi.org/10.1080/10705510903439003  Henseler, J., Ringle, C. M., & Sinkovics, R. R. (2009).   The use of partial least squares path modeling in international marketing.  In Advances in International Marketing, Vol. 20. R. R. Sinkovics & P. N. Ghauri (Eds.), New Challenges to International  Marketing (pp. 277-319).   https://doi.org/10.1108/S1474-7979(2009)0000020014  Kahu, E. R. (2013). Framing student engagement in higher education.   Studies in Higher Education, 38 (5), 758-773.   https://doi.  org/10.1080/03075079.2011.598505  Kember, D., Biggs, J., & Leung, D. Y. P. (2004). Examining the multidimensionality of approaches to learning through  the development of a revised version of the Learning Process Questionnaire. 74(2), 261-279.   https://doi.  org/10.1348/000709904773839879  Kuh, G. D., Cruce, T. M., Shoup, R., Kinzie, J., & Gonyea, R. M. (2008). Unmasking the Effects of Student Engagement on  First-Year College Grades and Persistence.   The Journal of Higher Education, 79 (5), 540-563.   https://doi.org/10.1080  /00221546.2008.11772116  Kuh, G. D., Kinzie, J., Buckley, J. A., Bridges, B. K., & Hayek, J. C. (2007). Piecing together the student success puzzle:  research, propositions, and recommendations. In Vol. 32.   https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ791634  Leveson, L., McNeil, N., & Joiner, T. (2013). Persist or withdraw: the importance of external factors in students’ departure  intentions.   Higher Education Research & Development, 32 (6), 932-945.   https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2013.806  442  Longman, D. G., & Atkinson, R. H. J. P., MN: West Publishing Co. (1988). College Learning and Study Skills. In St. Paul, MN:  West Publishing Co.   https://archive.org/details/collegelearnings0000long  Lundquist, C., Spalding, R. J., & Landrum, R. E. (2002). College student’s thoughts about leaving the university: The impact  of faculty attitudes and behaviors. J ournal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory & Practice, 4 (2), 123-133.  https://doi.org/10.2190/FLAL-7AM5-Q6K3-L40P  Macan, T. H., & Shahani, C. (1990). College Students’ Time Management: Correlations With Academic Performance and  Stress. J ournal of Educational Psychology, 82 (4), 760-768.   https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0022-0663.82.4.760  MacKie, S. E. (2001). Jumping the Hurdles – Undergraduate Student Withdrawal Behaviour.   Innovations in Education and  Teaching International, 38 (3), 265-276.   https://doi.org/10.1080/14703290110056371  Matteau, L., Toupin, I., Ouellet, N., Beaulieu, M., Truchon, M., & Gilbert-Ouimet, M. (2023). Nursing students’ academic  conditions, psychological distress, and intention to leave school: A cross-sectional study.   Nurse Education Today, 129 ,  105877.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2023.105877  Mtshweni, B. V. (2021). Adjustment and socioeconomic status: how do these factors influence the intention to dropout of  university?   South African Journal of Psychology, 52 (2), 262-274.   https://doi.org/10.1177/008124632110591  Natoli, R., Jackling, B., & Siddique, S. (2015). Insights into departure intention: A qualitative case study. Education Research  Perspectives, 42, 459-490.   https://www.proquest.com/scholarly-journals/insights-into-departure-intention-qualitative/  docview/1765642305/se-2  Nieuwoudt, J. E., & Pedler, M. L. (2021). Student retention in higher education: Why students choose to remain at  university.   Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory & Practice, 25 (2), 326-349.   https://doi.  org/10.1177/1521025120985228  Nunnally, J. C. (1978).   Psychometric Theory: 2d Ed : McGraw-Hill.  Omar, N. A., Nazri, M. A., Abu, N. K., & Omar, Z. (2009). Parents’ perceived service quality, satisfaction and trust of a  childcare centre: Implication on loyalty.   International Review of Business Research Papers, 5 (5), 299-314.   https://  www.researchgate.net/publication/228435945_Parents_Perceived_Service_Quality_Satisfaction_and_Trust_of_a_  Childcare_Centre_Implication_on_Loyalty  Orion., H. C., Forosuelo, E. J. D., & Cavalida, J. M. (2014). Factors affecting students’ decision to drop out of school.   Education  Research International, 2 (1), 1-16.   https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/7704142  Pascarella, E. T., & Terenzini, P. T. (1991). How college affects students: Findings and insights from twenty years of research,  Academe 78 (4), 44–47.   https://doi.org/10.2307/40250363  Lewis, L. S. (1992). [Review of How College Affects Students: Findings and Insights from Twenty Years of Research, by E. T.  Pascarella & P. T. Terenzini].   Academe, 78 (4), 44–47.   https://doi.org/10.2307/40250363  Peltz, J. S., Bodenlos, J. S., Kingery, J. N., & Rogge, R. D. (2021). The role of financial strain in college students’ work hours,  sleep, and mental health.   Journal of American College Health, 69 (6), 577-584.   https://doi.org/10.1080/07448481.201  9.1705306  Pijl, S. J., Frostad, P., & Mjaavatn, P. E. (2014). Students with special educational needs in secondary education: are they  intending to learn or to leave?   European Journal of Special Needs Education, 29 (1), 16-28.   https://doi.org/10.1080/08  856257.2013.830442  Reynolds, G. L. (2007). The impact of facilities on recruitment and retention of students.   New Directions for Institutional  Research, 2007 (135), 63-80.   https://doi.org/10.1002/ir.223  Rovai, A. P., & Jordan, H. M. (2004). Blended Learning and Sense of Community: A comparative analysis with traditional and  fully online graduate courses.   International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 5 (2), 1-13.   https://  doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v5i2.192  Schnettler, T., Bobe, J., Scheunemann, A., Fries, S., & Grunschel, C. (2020). Is it still worth it? Applying expectancy-value  theory to investigate the intraindividual motivational process of forming intentions to drop out from university. Motivation  and Emotion, 44, 491-507.   https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-020-09822-w

