Page 6:
The Application of K - Means ....   Anita   et al.   602  Nanotechnology Perceptions   Vol.   20   No. S 3   (202 4 )  Fig   - 2 The simulation graph categorises the students in the above - average category. In this  three cluster groups are made of 81.41 %, 66.50% and 94.91%. These cluster groups of  students are good in academic performance. that shown need not to be taken special care to  students.  Fig.   3. Average Performance of the students  Fig   - 3 The simulation graph categorises the students in the average category. In this three  cluster groups are made of 56.50 %, 51.49% and 59.80%. These cluster groups of students  are good in academic performance. that shows the need to take care of students in the  conduction of class tests, quizzes and Lab performance.  Fig .4. Weak Performance Students

Page 2:
The Application of K - Means ....   Anita   et al.   598  Nanotechnology Perceptions   Vol.   20   No. S 3   (202 4 )  Academicians frequently use GPA as a criterion for assessing a programme in an academic  setting. A student's ability to function academically and maintain a high GPA, which is a  reflection of their overall academic success, may be hampered by a variety of issues. By  tracking the advancement of their students' performance, faculty members can use these  elements to target when creating initiatives to increase the calibre of their students' learning  behaviours   and   academic   achievement.   The   K - Means   clustering   technique   using  MATLABr2023b makes it feasible to identify the essential traits for predicting student  success in the future.  This study presents the K - Means clustering algorithm using the straightforward and effective  MATLAB r2023b simulation tool, which tracks the advancement of students' academic  achievement in education.  2. LITERATURE REVIEW  One of the most important methods in data mining for analysing data sets is clustering. Over  the past few decades, a number of clustering algorithms with improved performance have  been used for a variety of applications.In this studyVarious tactics can be categorised as  clustering approaches, such as density, model building, situation awareness in online  learning, partitioning and hierarchical clustering, and others[1].This research paper presents ,  the K - means method has been successfully used. K - means is a partitioning approach that  divides data into sets according to how close they are to one another.[2]. The original K -  means method did not work well for many applications since it used Euclidean distance to  replicate an assumed pattern of resemblance between data points.[3]. This Study discussed  the benefits and drawbacks of the original K - means algorithm and suggested methods to  increase clustering accuracy and shorten calculation times. [ 4 ]. This presents the cluster  latent data representations, presented a nonlinear function that incorporated a dimensionality  reduction (DR) and K - means partitioning. The combined data demonstrated improved  performance in addition to the advantages of merging the two activities [5].In this paper  author using data from news headlines. determined the optimal number of clusters in the K -  means algorithm using both the elbow technique and conventional K - means.[6] Next, the  researchers evaluated news headline clustering internally using the purity approach. The  results were then used to determine the ideal amount of clusters created using the Elbow  approach..[7]In This research paper, K - means technique statistically clusters students' grades  and   GPA   from   online   learning   courses   based   on   past   commonalities.   The   findings  demonstrated that   every group of students completed distinct   assignments to review,  completed tests, and dedicated more study time to the assigned chapters.when comparable  student activities and backgrounds resulted in comparable performance[8].  3.   METHODOLOGY  3.1 Data Clustering  One statistical and unsupervised method for analysing data is data clustering. In order to   find  hidden patterns and how they relate to one another, it is mostly employed on massive data  sets to facilitate swift and effective decision - making. In essence, it is employed to group

Page 3:
599   Anita   et al.   The Application of K - Means ....  Nanotechnology Perceptions   Vol.   20   No. S 3   (202 4 )  similar data values together into homogeneous categories. Stated otherwise, the cluster  analysis technique divides the large data set into clusters, which are subsets. Every cluster is  made up of a collection of related data values that are grouped together inside the same  cluster but differ from the data values found in other items.  3.2 Definition of K -   Means Clustering Algorithm  The K - means algorithm selects K objects (data points) at random, each of which initially  represents a cluster mean or centre. For each of the remaining data points or objects, an  object is assigned to the cluster to which it is most comparable based on the distance  between the object and the cluster mean. The new mean for each cluster is then determined.  Repeat this method until the criterion function converges. This is a simple technique that has  been applied to many different problem fields.  3.3   K - Means Clustering Algorithm  The following steps make up the algorithm:  1. Insert K points into the space that the clustering objects (data points) represent. The first  set of centroids is represented by these positions.  2. Assign every item (data point) to the group whose centroid is nearest.  3. Recalculate the locations of the K centroids after assigning all objects (data points).  4. Continue doing Steps 2 and 3 until the centroids stop moving. As a result, the data points  for the objects are divided into groups from which the metric that needs to be minimized can  be determined.  5. The squared error function is the objective function that this approach seeks to minimize.  The goal function is   –  where   is a chosen distance measurebetween a datapoint   cluster centre   , is  an indicator of the distance of the   n   data points from their respective cluster centres.  3.4Characteristics of   K - Means Algorithm  •   The K - means clustering algorithm looks for K partitions where the squared error  functions are as little as   possible.  •   The algorithm's computational complexity is O(nkt), which makes it comparatively  scalable and effective in processing huge data sets. Where  N= Total number of objects (data items)  K= Number of Clusters  T= Total number of iterations

Page 4:
The Application of K - Means ....   Anita   et al.   600  Nanotechnology Perceptions   Vol.   20   No. S 3   (202 4 )  •   This well - known centroid - based method divides a set of n objects (data items) into k  clusters with the parameter k such that the resulting intracluster similarity is high but the  intercluster similarity is low.  •   This algorithm mainly terminates at the local time.  •   The centroid, or centre of gravity, of a cluster is the mean value of the data items in  the cluster, and this value is used to quantify similarity in this clustering technique.  Fig. 1. Flow Chart of K - Means Clustering Algorithm.  3.5 Formula to compute the Euclidean Distance  The distance between two points in the plane with coordinates   (x, y)   and   (a, b)   is given by -  dist ((x, y), (a,b)) = √(x - a) 2 +(y - b) 2 (1)  Table 1. Student Database  Rollno   GPA   Class  Internals  Attendance   Assignment   Lab  Performance  1   365   19   20   YES   GOOD  2   353   18   18   YES   GOOD  3   197   17   18   YES   GOOD  4   134   15   13   YES   GOOD  5   15   12   8   NO   POOR  6   24   10   4   YES   POOR  7   24   10   4   NO   POOR  8   278   20   18   YES   GOO D

Page 5:
601   Anita   et al.   The Application of K - Means ....  Nanotechnology Perceptions   Vol.   20   No. S 3   (202 4 )  This study uses the MATLAB r2023b simulation to demonstrate the application of k - means  clustering. In table 1. The "student data" contained in student - data.m, a comma - separated  format, served as the basis for the sample data set utilised in this example. Higher education  institutions provided the student data figures. This work makes the assumption that the  necessary data pre - processing has been carried out. Student - means.m is the data file that was  produced. The student data set will determine how the K - means algorithm clusters the data.  Three categories are used to classify the cluster: above average, average, and weak. We can  determine the pace of progress of the student data set by closely examining the progression.  Additionally, we are able to determine the causes of above average, average, weak, and level  performance. It provides the exact result. And based on the cluster outcome, we can improve  the student's academic performance.  Table 2. GPA Grade of the Students  Performance   GPA   No of  Students  Percentage  Above Average   >=3.50   30   50  Average   2.00>=<3.50   25   41.66  Weak   <=2.00   5   8.33  In Table 2. By utilising the K - means clustering algorithm on the training data, we are able to  classify the students into three groups based on their new grades: "Above Average,"  "Average," and "Weak." The previous semester's grade — which includes both internal and  external assessments — is used to compute the new grade. The accompanying graph and table  are shown below.  4. RESULT  When we use the simulation on MATLAB r2023b for the clustering method to the student  data - based .   Then we group the students into three categories. One is above average, the  second is medium and the Last is weak. A graphical representation of these three categories  is given below  Fig.   2.   Above average Performance of the Students

Page 7:
603   Anita   et al.   The Application of K - Means ....  Nanotechnology Perceptions   Vol.   20   No. S 3   (202 4 )  Fig - 4 The simulation graph categorises the students in the weak category. In these three  cluster groups are made of 43.85 %, 37.42 % and 48.42%. These cluster groups of students  are not good in academic performance. that shows Need a lot of practice in his/her lessons  and also takes care of all the courses ct,labs,quiz , and attendance carefully.  5. CONCLUSION  In this study, we employ the k - means clustering algorithm as part of a data mining process in  the student database to forecast the learning activities of the students. We anticipate that both  instructors and students may find use for the material produced by the application of data  mining and data clustering techniques. This effort may enhance student performance and  reduce the failing ratio by implementing the appropriate measures at the appropriate times to  improve the quality of education.By taking the proper actions at the correct time to improve  the quality of education, this work may improve student performance and lower the failing  ratio. We intend to improve our method in subsequent research to produce more accurate and  valuable outputs that will help teachers enhance their students' learning objectives.  References  1.   Adeyemo, S. A: The relationship between effective classroom management and students'  academic achievement, European Journal of Educational Studies, 4(3), 367 - 381.(2012).  2.   A.   Burgess, C. Senior, E. MooresA 10 - year case study on the changing determinants of  university student satisfaction in the UK PloS One, 13, pp. 1 - 15(2018)  3.   Bell, S. Project - based learning for the 21st century: Skills for the future. The Clearing House,  83(2), 39 - 43.(2010)  4.   B.J. Frey, D. Dueck Clustering by passing messages Between data Points315, pp. 972 - 976  (2017)  5.   Cothran, D. J., & Ennis, C. D. (1997). Students' and teachers' perceptions of conflict and  power. Teaching and teachereducation, 13(5), 541 - 553 (1997).  6.   Oyelade, Oladipupo &Obagbuwa, ”Applicationof K - means clustering IJCSIS,vol.7,No.1, pp -  292.(2010)  7.   Rousseeuw P.J.: Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster  analysis. Journal of computational and appliedmathematics 20, 53 - 65 (1987).  8.   U. Bodenhofer, A. Kothmeier, S.APCluster HochreiterAn R package for Affinity Propagation  ClusteringBioinformatics, 27 , pp. 2463 - 2464 (2011)

Page 1:
Nanotechnology Perceptions   20   No. S 3   (202 4 )   597 – 6 03  The Application of K - Means Clustering to  Analyze and Enhance Academic  Performance  Anita, Naveen Kumar, Mridula Yadav, Karishma, Yudhishthir  Yadav ,   Reena Sharma  Assistant Professor IPEM College, Ghaziabad, U.P India  Email:   anita.singh@ipemgzb.ac.in  The rapidly expanding educational database in higher education institutions is one of the  important   realities.   These   databases   are   growing   quickly   with   no   advantage   to   database  management.   These   days,   clustering   techniques   are   widely   used   and   important,   and   their  significance only seems to rise with the volume of data.The K - means clustering technique is used  in this paper to assess the academic performance of the students. Cluster analysis is used in this  study to divide students into groups based on shared attributes. This includes the evaluation  criteria for the students, such as internal class grades, GPA, assignments, lab work, and mid -   and  final exams. It is advised that the class instructor be informed of all of these associated details  before the final exam.Teachers will benefit from this re - search by seeing a notable decrease in the  dropout rate and an improvement in student performance. This work presents an ideal approach  based on the K - Means Clustering algorithm utilizing the MATLABr2023b simulation, which  allows educators to improve the quality of education provided to students. Based on this  approach, educators can then take the appropriate action to raise students' academic performance.  further   comprises   a   thorough   examination   of   the   student   performance   data   record   results  following the MATLABr2023b simulation.  Keywords:   k - Meansclustering,cluster mean, centroid, Database, GPA .  1.   I ntroduction  One important data mining technology is cluster analysis. It separates the datasets into a  number of significant clusters that each represent the inherent structure of the dataset. A  cluster is an assembly of data elements that are similar in common and are measured using  the same type of information. By using a process called clustering, data items are grouped  into different sets. Data points within a set are referred to as dissimilar sets, while those  inside different sets are known as comparable sets. A popular strategy for predicting a  student's   academic   achievement   in   the   future   is   clustering.   A   metric   of   academic  performance   that   is   most   frequently   employed   is   the   graded   point   average   (GPA).

