Page 1:
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Nurse Education Today  journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nedt  Review Curriculum design and attrition among undergraduate nursing students: A systematic review Zenobia C.Y. Chan ⁎ , Wing Yan Cheng, Man Kwan Fong, Yuk Sum Fung, Yin Ming Ki, Yee Ling Li, Hoi Tung Wong, Tsz Ling Wong, Wan Fei Tsoi  School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong  A R T I C L E   I N F O  Keywords:  Curriculum design Attrition Nursing education Undergraduate A B S T R A C T Attrition rates among nursing students are a global issue, and a possible factor in current nursing shortages. Numerous studies have been conducted to determine why students drop out of nursing programmes. The lim- itations of previous studies have included overly small sample sizes, being largely descriptive, and not focusing on attrition as an outcome. The aim of this study is to review the issue of attrition among undergraduate nursing students in relation to curriculum design. Five electronic databases, namely CINAHL, Medline, Cochrane Library, British Nursing Index, and PsycINFO, were adopted. Using the Population-Intervention-Comparison-Outcome model, search terms were identi fi ed, such as   ‘ student nurse ’ ,   ‘ undergraduate programme ’ ,   ‘ curriculum design ’ , and   ‘ attrition ’ . Mixed Method Appraisal Tools were used to evaluate the methodological quality of the identi fi ed research papers. A total of 16 publications were reviewed and four themes were identi fi ed: pre-enrolment cri- teria for recruiting nursing students; curriculum content; clinical placement-related policies; and student support services. Institutional-level risk factors that could be reduced were identi fi ed, including academic failure, poor clinical performance, stress, and unrealistic expectations of nursing. This review gives insights into how a curriculum for undergraduate nursing programmes can be designed that will engage students and increase the nursing workforce.  1. Background  Nurses play a signi fi cant role in healthcare systems. According to the World Health Organization (2018), nurses and midwives comprise nearly 50% of the global health workforce. They provide primary care and treatment to patients, educate the public about the importance of health in the community, and participate in controlling diseases and infections   (World   Health   Organization,   2018).   Therefore,   the   im- portance of nursing education and training cannot be overemphasized. Today, most registered nurses are trained in universities, where the emphasis   is   on   critical   thinking,   leadership,   systems   analysis,   and teamwork (American Association of Colleges of Nursing, 2016; The Nursing Council of Hong Kong, 2016). Students need to complete a bachelor's degree to become registered nurses. However, a signi fi cant number of students worldwide drop out from undergraduate nursing programmes (ten Hoeve et al., 2017). Hence, the complex reasons behind such attrition need to be investigated, such as personal, institutional, course-related, and   fi nancial factors (Urwin et al., 2010). Of these, it is practical to explore the design of the un- dergraduate nursing curriculum, because it can potentially be modi fi ed and improved so that students can better enjoy and appreciate their learning experience (Taylor, 2005). This will encourage more students to complete their nursing programme and increase the supply of nurses, easing the burden on public healthcare systems.  1.1. Design of the Undergraduate Nursing Curriculum  Curriculum design is de fi ned as   ‘ all educational experiences that learners have in an educational programme, the purpose of which is to achieve goals and objectives that have been developed within a fra- mework of theory and research, past and present professional practice, and the changing needs of society ’   (Parkay et al., 2014). Mooring (2016) showed that curriculum design is closely related to the retention of nursing students. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2018.11.024 Received 31 July 2018; Received in revised form 9 November 2018; Accepted 25 November 2018  ⁎   Corresponding author at: School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong.  E-mail addresses:   zenobia.chan@polyu.edu.hk (Z.C.Y. Chan), 14085059d@connect.polyu.hk (W.Y. Cheng), 14085432d@connect.polyu.hk (M.K. Fong), 14085501d@connect.polyu.hk (Y.S. Fung), 14085241d@connect.polyu.hk (Y.M. Ki), 14084778d@connect.polyu.hk (Y.L. Li), 14081237d@connect.polyu.hk (H.T. Wong), 14085798d@connect.polyu.hk (T.L. Wong), 14085844d@connect.polyu.hk (W.F. Tsoi).  Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  0260-6917/ © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  T

Page 2:
1.2. Signi fi cance of Nurse Attrition  Nursing shortages are a globally recognized issue because of ageing populations and escalating demands on healthcare services. In Hong Kong, the nurse-to-patient ratio in hospitals is 1:11 in the daytime shift, far higher than the international standard of 1:6 (Department of Health, 2016). One reason for the shortage of nurses is attrition in under- graduate nursing programmes. The attrition rate is about 25% in Britain (Fowler and Norrie, 2009), 24.5% in Australia (Gaynor et al., 2007), and 50% in some nursing programmes in the United States (Brown and Marshall, 2008). In Hong Kong, it is about 5% (Watson et al., 2008). Although this   fi gure is comparatively low, it still contributes to recent and future shortfalls of nurses in hospitals (Stewart et al., 2006). Cameron et al. (2011) suggested that nurse shortages are also asso- ciated with sta ff   dissatisfaction, leading to attrition after quali fi cation, compounding the nurse shortage. The shortfall of nurses erodes the quality of healthcare services and increases patient morbidity and mortality (Organization for Economic and Co-operation Development, 2008). More robust academic activities ranging from preventive to curative in nature have been suggested for interventions aimed at reducing the attrition rate in higher education institutions (HEIs). The preventative measures that have been proposed include imposing higher admission requirements such as nursing-related work experience (Wilson et al., 2011), selecting students who indicate that nursing is their   fi rst choice (Salamonson et al., 2014), and selecting those who have taken science- related subjects and achieved good academic performance (Potolsky et al., 2003). Curative measures include introducing students to clinical mentors, academic advisors, and peer mentors (Robinson and Niemer, 2010; Jokelainen et al., 2011), and implementing stress management programmes such as those focusing on cognitive-behavioral therapy and relaxation techniques (Galbraith and Brown, 2011). In general, a curriculum can be designed to include the aforementioned measures to reduce attrition among baccalaureate student nurses.  1.3. Reasons for Attrition among Undergraduate Nursing Students  According to Glossop (2002), attrition is de fi ned as   ‘ the di ff erence between the number of students beginning each cohort and the num- bers who completed that cohort ’ . Since high attrition rates among un- dergraduate nursing students have been reported globally, the various internal and external reasons for this phenomenon have been studied. Personality traits have been identi fi ed as one of the causes (McLaughlin et   al.,   2008).   Less   help-seeking   behaviour   has   been   observed   in  Records identified  through databases searching (n=20522) Records after limiting the time frame (n=20377) Records after duplicates removed (n=16006) Records after titles screened (n=1004) Records after abstracts screened (n=120) Full-text articles screened for eligibility (n=16) Studies included in the qualitative synthesis (n=7) Records excluded (n=602) Records excluded (n=884) Full-text articles excluded, with reasons (n=104) Undergraduate nursing students not participants, Studies focusing on factors of retention, reviews, no measurement on attrition Articles retrieved from reference list of included papers (n=3) Identification Eligibility Screening Included  Fig. 1.   PRISMA   fl owchart.  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  42

Page 9:
Table 4   ( continued ) Author, year, country Aims   Study design   Sampling i) Sample size ii) Type of participants iii) Gender Data collection method   Data analysis method   Main focus and signi fi cant   fi ndings in fl uenced students' choices whether to stay or leave the programme. ten Hoeve et al. (2017) The Netherlands To examine both intrinsic and extrinsic factors that in fl uence student nurses' decision to leave or complete their program Qualitative exploratory descriptive design i) n = 17 ii) Student nurses at the beginning of their third year of the four-year Bachelor's program at four universities of Applied Sciences in the Netherlands, from December 2013 to January 2014 iii) Female: 15 Male: 2 Semi-structured interviews   Thematic analysis   The main reasons for students to become nurses were the caring aspect, personal experiences with healthcare, role models in their immediate environment, and job opportunities. They had both altruistic and professional perceptions of their profession. Reasons for attrition were strongly related to the training programme and to their clinical placements, in particular the perceived lack of support from mentors and leam. Feelings of being welcomed and working in a nice team proved to be more important reasons for completing the programme than the speci fi c clinical  fi eld. Wells (2007) US To examine the reasons that a sample of undergraduate baccalaureate nursing students withdrew from their nursing programs Qualitative study   i) n = 11 ii) Nursing students who left generic baccalaureate nursing programs located in an urban area of a southeastern state between fall 1998 and spring 2000 iii) Female: 10 Male: 1 Semi-structured interview guide was used to conduct taped telephone interviews with study participants Thematic data analysis   Nursing student departure did not appear to be related to a single stressor but a combination of two or more stressor such as a cumulative e ff ect of study participants' disillusionment about the nursing program practices and the nursing profession, perceived lack of support from faculty, and/or nursing sta ff   for the achievement of the students' educational goals, disillusionment about campus life and the campus environment, and/or stressors in the external environment.  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  49

Page 13:
Glogowska, M., Young, P., Lockyer, L., 2007. Should I go or should I stay? A study of factors in fl uencing students' decisions on early leaving. Act. Learn. High. Educ. 8 (1), 63 – 77. Glossop, C., 2002. Student nurse attrition: use of an exit-interview procedure to determine students' leaving reasons. Nurse Educ. Today 22 (5), 375 – 386. Gopalakrishnan, S., Ganeshkumar, P., 2013. Systematic reviews and meta-analysis: un- derstanding the best evidence in primary healthcare. J. Fam. Med. Prim. Care 2 (1), 9 – 14. Hamshire, C., Willgoss, T.G., Wibberley, C., 2012.   ‘ The placement was probably the tipping point ’ –   the narratives of recently discontinued students. Nurse Educ. Pract. 12 (4), 182 – 186. Hamshire, C., Willgoss, T.G., Wibberley, C., 2013. Should I stay or should I go? A study exploring why healthcare students consider leaving their programme. Nurse Educ. Today 33 (8), 889 – 895. Jokelainen, M., Turunen, H., Tossavainen, K., Jamookeeah, D., Coco, K., 2011. A sys- tematic review of mentoring nursing students in clinical placements. J. Clin. Nurs. 20 (19 – 20), 2854 – 2867. Kukkonen, P., Suhonen, R., Salminen, L., 2016. Discontinued students in nursing edu- cation – who and why? Nurse Educ. Pract. 17, 67 – 73. Last, L., Fulbrook, P., 2003. Why do student nurses leave? Suggestions from a Delphi study. Nurse Educ. Today 23 (6), 449 – 458. McKendry, S., Wright, M., Stevenson, K., 2014. Why here and why stay? Students' voices on the retention strategies of a widening participation university. Nurse Educ. Today 34 (5), 872 – 877. McLaughlin, K., Moutray, M., Muldoon, O., 2008. The role of personality and self-e ffi cacy in the selection and retention of successful nursing students: a longitudinal study. J. Adv. Nurs. 61 (2), 211 – 221. Merkley, B.R., 2015. Student nurse attrition: a half century of research. J. Nurs. Educ. Pract. 6 (3), 71. Mooring, Q.E., 2016. Recruitment, advising, and retention programs — challenges and solutions to the international problem of poor nursing student retention: a narrative literature review. Nurse Educ. Today 40, 204 – 208. Nursing Council of New Zealand, 2017. Handbook for Nursing Departments O ff ering Programmes Leading to Registration as an Enrolled Nurse or a Registered Nurse (Retrieved on 1 April 2018. Available at). http://www.nursingcouncil.org.nz/ Education/Schools-Handbook. O'Donnell, H., 2011. Expectations and voluntary attrition in nursing students. Nurse Educ. Pract. 11 (1), 54 – 63. Organization for Economic and Co-operation Development, 2008. OECD Annual Report. OECD Publishing, Paris, pp. 2008. Panic, N., Leoncini, E., De Belvis, G., Ricciardi, W., Boccia, S., 2013. Evaluation of the endorsement of the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-ana- lysis (PRISMA) statement on the quality of published systematic review and meta- analyses. PLoS One 8 (12), e83138. Parkay, F.W., Anctil, E.J., Hass, G., 2014. Curriculum Leadership: Readings for Developing Quality Educational Programs. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey. Pitt, V., Powis, D., Levett-Jones, T., Hunter, S., 2012. Factors in fl uencing nursing students' academic and clinical performance and attrition: an integrative literature review. Nurse Educ. Today 32 (8), 903 – 913. Pluye, P., Robert, E., Cargo, M., Bartlett, G., O ’ Cathain, A., Gri ffi ths, F., Boardman, F., Gagnon, M.P., Rousseau, M.C., 2011. Proposal: A mixed methods appraisal tool for systematic mixed studies reviews.   Retrieved on July 15, 2018 from. http:// mixedmethodsappraisaltoolpublic.pbworks.com. Potolsky, A., Cohen, J., Saylor, C., 2003. Academic performance of nursing students: do prerequisite grades and tutoring make a di ff erence? Nurs. Educ. Perspect. 24 (5), 246 – 250. Pryjmachuk, S., Easton, K., Littlewood, A., 2009. Nurse education: factors associated with attrition. J. Adv. Nurs. 65 (1), 149 – 160. Robinson, E., Niemer, L., 2010. A peer mentor tutor program for academic success in nursing. Nurs. Educ. Perspect. 31 (5), 286 – 289. Salamonson, Y., Everett, B., Cooper, M., Lombardo, L., Weaver, R., Davidson, P.M., 2014. Nursing as   fi rst choice predicts nursing program completion. Nurse Educ. Today 34 (1), 127 – 131. Schardt, C., Adams, M.B., Owens, T., Keitz, S., Fontelo, P., 2007. Utilization of the PICO framework to improve searching PubMed for clinical questions. BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak. 7 (1), 16. Souto, R.Q., Khanassov, V., Hong, Q.N., Bush, P.L., Vedel, I., Pluye, P., 2015. Systematic mixed studies reviews: updating results on the reliability and e ffi ciency of the mixed methods appraisal tool. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 52 (1), 500 – 501. Stewart, S., Yorkston, E., Turner, C., Gaynor, L., Gallasch, T., 2006. Where do all the undergraduate and new graduate nurses go and why? A search for empirical research evidence. Aust. J. Adv. Nurs. 24 (2), 26. Taylor, R., 2005. Creating a connection: tackling student attrition through curriculum development. J. Furth. High. Educ. 29 (4), 367 – 374. ten Hoeve, Y., Castelein, S., Jansen, G., Roodbol, P., 2017. Dreams and disappointments regarding nursing: student nurses' reasons for attrition and retention. A qualitative study design. Nurse Educ. Today 54, 28 – 36. The Nursing Council of Hong Kong, 2016. A Reference Guide to the Syllabus of Subjects and Requirements for the Preparation of Registered Nurse (general) in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Retrieved on 1 April 2018. Available at:). http:// www.nchk.org.hk/ fi lemanager/en/pdf/sf04.pdf. Uman, L.S., 2011. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses. J. Can. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 20 (1), 57. Urwin, S., Stanley, R., Jones, M., Gallagher, A., Wainwright, P., Perkins, A., 2010. Understanding student nurse attrition: learning from the literature. Nurse Educ. Today 30 (2), 202 – 207. Watson, R., Deary, I., Thompson, D., Li, G., 2008. A study of stress and burnout in nursing students in Hong Kong: a questionnaire survey. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 45 (10), 1534 – 1542. Wells, M.I., 2007. Dreams deferred but not deterred: a qualitative study on undergraduate nursing student attrition. J. Coll. Stud. Retent. Res. Theory Pract. 8 (4), 439 – 456. Wilson, A., Chur-Hansen, A., Marshall, A., Air, T., 2011. Should nursing-related work experience be a prerequisite for acceptance into a nursing programme?: a study of students' reasons for withdrawing from undergraduate nursing at an Australian university. Nurse Educ. Today 31 (5), 456 – 460. World Health Organization, 2018. Nursing and Midwifery.   Available at: http://www. who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/nursing-midwifery/en/, Accessed date: 8 March 2018. Wray, J., Barrett, D., Aspland, J., Gardiner, E., 2012. Staying the course: factors in fl u- encing pre-registration nursing student progression into year 2 — a retrospective co- hort study. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 49 (11), 1432 – 1442.  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  53

Page 3:
individuals with lower self-e ffi cacy, who then tend to have less moti- vation to meet the standards in university (Pitt et al., 2012). Students with poor coping   and stress management skills   are also prone to dropping out from nursing programmes, particularly at the time of their  fi rst clinical placement (Galvin et al., 2015). Students may under- estimate   the knowledge   and responsibilities   required to become a professional nurse due to a lack of previous experience in a caring profession (Kukkonen et al., 2016). The discrepancy between their perceptions   and   their   clinical   experience   thus   leads   to   attrition (O'Donnell, 2011). External forces also a ff ect dropout rates. The clinical placement is an   important   part   of   a   baccalaureate   nursing   programme,   with   a minimum of 1400 and 1100 h of clinical placement required in Hong Kong and New Zealand, respectively (The Nursing Council of Hong Kong, 2016; Nursing Council of New Zealand, 2017). The clinical pla- cement experience a ff ects student attrition (Pryjmachuk et al., 2009; Wray et al., 2012). According to ten Hoeve et al. (2017), the perception of a lack of support from clinical mentors and sta ff   reinforced the de- cision of students to discontinue their studies. Moreover, unexpectedly high academic demands and heavy workloads in university, are factors that have been noted to contribute to attrition (Chan et al., 2009; O'Donnell, 2011). In summary, complex factors related to attrition have been analysed in previous studies, but little attention has been paid to the design of the curriculum in undergraduate nursing programmes. This issue thus requires further exploration. A search using the established keywords uncovered four systematic reviews for comparison (Stewart et al., 2006; Cameron et al., 2011; Eick et al., 2012; Mooring, 2016). Many studies were methodologically limited, being descriptive rather than analytical, reliant on small con- venience samples, and focused on assessing intentions rather than on measuring attrition or retention as outcomes. Instead of considering clinical placements (Eick et al., 2012) or other factors (Mooring, 2016), the aim of this study is to explore how curriculum design a ff ects attri- tion among nursing students. To obtain more comprehensive data the focus is solely on undergraduates (Stewart et al., 2006), with no geo- graphical limitations (Cameron et al., 2011).  2. Method  This research was conducted by means of a systematic review (Uman, 2011). In this study, the PRISMA checklist 2009 was adopted (Fig. 1) because of its transparency and clarity. The items of the checklist provide clear instructions and guidance on how to conduct a systematic   review (Gopalakrishnan   and   Ganeshkumar,   2013;   Panic et al., 2013).  2.1. Samples and Settings  The PICO model was adopted to assist in organizing the keywords (Schardt et al., 2007). Tables 1 and 2 show the identi fi ed keywords, and one example of this search for papers in Medline via OvidSP.  2.2. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  To ensure the relevance of the selected research papers, speci fi c screening criteria were adopted. For inclusion, the study samples had to be made up largely of undergraduate nursing students and the focus had to be on student attrition and programme design. The papers also had to be primary research publications written in English and pub- lished between 1999 and 2018. The exclusion criteria included papers in which the majority of the participants in the study were not under- graduate nursing students, papers focusing on areas other than student attrition and programme design, literature reviews, dissertations, pa- pers not written in English, and those published outside of the above mentioned time frame.  2.3. Measurement and Outcomes  A search of all of the databases yielded 20,522, with 17,726 re- maining after a timeframe was imposed (Fig. 1). After a screening using the CINAHL database, 49 out of 325 entries were eliminated. The research team consisted of eight nursing students supervised by a nurse educator. The students were divided into two subgroups for peer reviews. Two student authors would independently screen titles, abstracts, or full-text publications, and then conduct a peer review. If there were any disagreements on the results of the screening, the su- pervisor would assist in verifying the results.  2.4. Quality Appraisal and Analytic Procedures  Since qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-methods studies were included in this review, the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) (Souto et al., 2015) was adopted for the two reviewers (student authors) to evaluate the quality of the selected research studies. In the begin- ning, two screening questions were used for all types of studies to de- termine whether the research questions or objectives had been clearly stated and whether the collected data suited the aims of the study. All 16 studies in this review met the requirements (Table 3). Section 1 of the MMAT was used to appraise the qualitative studies. A few limita- tions were found in two qualitative studies; for example, insu ffi cient consideration was given to the characteristics of the chosen universities versus those of other settings of the same type. However, the two stu- dies ful fi lled three of the four criteria, so those studies were deemed to be suitable for inclusion in this review. Sections 2, 3, and 4 focus on quantitative studies, namely, randomized controlled, non-randomized, and descriptive studies, respectively. The criteria for inclusion and ex- clusion were not clearly stated in one study, as the data were from an existing database and records in the study institute. Nevertheless the samples were related to the study's target population, so the study was considered relevant to this review. As for mixed-methods studies, Sec- tion 1 was used to appraise the qualitative component while Sections 2, 3, and 4 were used for the quantitative components. Section 5 was used for the mixed-methods component. All of the mixed-methods studies in this review were found to be of good quality. Thematic analysis (Boyatzis, 1998) was the approach used in this study. It is a   fl exible method used to analyse case studies and phe- nomenological, generic qualitative, and narrative data. It consists of six steps: Familiarization, Generating the initial codes, Creating the initial themes, Reviewing the initial themes, Naming and de fi ning the themes, and Writing the   fi nal report (Braun and Clarke, 2013). Themes can be discerned from the data by coding the transcripts and   fi nding the re- lationships between the coded transcripts.  3. Results  3.1. Methodologies  A total of 16 studies were included in this review, namely, 2 quantitative studies (Pryjmachuk et al., 2009; Abele et al., 2013), 9 qualitative studies (Glogowska et al., 2007; Wells, 2007; Andrew et al., 2008;   Bowden,   2008;   O'Donnell,   2011;   Hamshire   et   al.,   2012; Kukkonen et al., 2016; Farahani et al., 2017; ten Hoeve et al., 2017), and 5 mixed-methods studies (Last and Fulbrook, 2003; Brodie et al., 2004; Boyle et al., 2008; Banks et al., 2012; Hamshire et al., 2013) (Table 4). In 6 of the studies, questionnaires were used to collected data (Last and Fulbrook, 2003; Brodie et al., 2004; Glogowska et al., 2007; Andrew et al., 2008; Bowden, 2008; Banks et al., 2012), in 13 of the studies, data were collected through interviews (Last and Fulbrook, 2003; Brodie et al., 2004; Glogowska et al., 2007; Wells, 2007; Andrew et al., 2008; Bowden, 2008; O'Donnell, 2011; Banks et al., 2012; Hamshire et al., 2012; Hamshire et al., 2013; Kukkonen et al., 2016; Farahani et al., 2017; ten Hoeve et al., 2017), and in 4 studies, focus  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  43

Page 4:
group interviews were employed to obtain the data set (Last and Fulbrook, 2003; Brodie et al., 2004; Banks et al., 2012; Farahani et al., 2017).  3.2. Sample  The size of the sample in the studies ranged from 11 (Wells, 2007) to 1259 (Pryjmachuk et al., 2009), with larger sample sizes found in the quantitative studies and smaller sample sizes in the qualitative studies. The sex of the participants was speci fi ed in 10 papers (Glogowska et al., 2007; Wells, 2007; Andrew et al., 2008; Boyle et al., 2008; O'Donnell, 2011; Hamshire et al., 2012; Abele et al., 2013; Hamshire et al., 2013; Kukkonen et al., 2016; ten Hoeve et al., 2017), but not in the remaining 6 papers (Last and Fulbrook, 2003; Brodie et al., 2004; Bowden, 2008; Pryjmachuk et al., 2009; Banks et al., 2012; Farahani et al., 2017). Females accounted for the majority of the samples where gender was speci fi ed. In some studies, the age of the participants was not men- tioned. The participants in the studies were of diverse ethnicities, in- cluding African American, American Indian, Asian, Hispanic, White European, Chinese, and Latin Americans. Convenience sampling was the most frequently used method of sampling in the studies, but pur- posive sampling was also used in some studies. The participants were recruited from di ff erent universities, colleges, nursing courses, or pre- registration nursing programmes in di ff erent countries.  3.3. Outcomes  Four main themes related to attrition and programme design were identi fi ed   from   these   studies:   pre-enrolment   criteria   for   recruiting nursing students, curriculum content, policies related to clinical pla- cements, and student support services (Table 5). All of the reasons for attrition, including those not related to programme design, were listed as well (Table 6). These four themes will form the framework for the following discussion.  3.4. Pre-enrolment Criteria for Recruiting Nursing Students  Prior to admission, attrition can be prevented through the proper screening of applicants. Farahani et al. (2017) found that nursing stu- dents who intended to leave or who had left the programme were under the illusion that nursing and medicine were similar, while some stu- dents   underestimated   the   academic   demands   of   the   programme (Glogowska et al., 2007; Wells, 2007; Andrew et al., 2008; Boyle et al., 2008; O'Donnell, 2011). Such students may demonstrate little or no commitment to the nursing profession. For instance, some chose nur- sing because they wanted to get a university degree, bypass the en- trance exam, and study another   fi eld such as medicine (Farahani et al., 2017). This highlights the importance of adopting pre-enrolment cri- teria. Pryjmachuk et al. (2009) found that age and educational quali fi - cations predicted completion rates. The risk of discontinuation in- creases with the following characteristics: being less mature, being from a minority group, being male, and having lower quali fi cations. Boyle et al. (2008) evaluated the e ff ectiveness of multiple strategies, in- cluding setting the following admission criteria: having experience in health-related work or volunteer experience, having multicultural ex- perience, living or working in the district where one would have a placement and work after graduation, and having taken prerequisite courses. Under such a programme, attrition rates were reduced by 5% and 14% in comparison with a traditional BSN programme and com- munity college nursing programme, respectively. Having pre-requisite courses in science and non-science subjects has been reported to be predictive of completion (Abele et al., 2013). It is argued that past experiences stemming from life events and family in fl uence may instil unrealistic expectations in students, leading to attrition (O'Donnell, 2011). Therefore, caution is required when assessing nursing students during the recruitment period. It is suggested that comprehensive in- formation be provided to students before enrolment, via open days, school visits, and pre-university career advice services, to enable stu- dents to consider how suited they are to a nursing career.  3.5. Curriculum Content  In the qualitative studies, the major complaint of students who quit was that they were unprepared for the depth and breadth of the courses  Table 1  Keywords in databases. Type of search terms   Search terms   Boolean operator Population MeSH/CINAHL headings   Students, Nursing/Students, Pre-Nursing/Students, Nursing, Baccalaureate/Students, Nursing, Practical/Baccalaureate Nurses/ Education, Nursing, Baccalaureate (MM   “ Students, Nursing ” ) OR (MM   “ Students, Pre-Nursing ” ) OR (MM   “ Students, Nursing, Baccalaureate ” ) OR (MM   “ Students, Nursing, Practical ” ) OR (MM   “ Baccalaureate Nurses ” ) OR (MM   “ Education, Nursing, Baccalaureate ” ) 1. OR 2. OR AND Freetext keywords   Student nurs*, nurs* students, undergraduate nurs*, baccalaureate nurs* Intervention MeSH/CINAHL headings   Education, Baccalaureate/Education, Clinical/Teaching Methods, Clinical/Teaching Materials, Clinical/Practical Nursing (MM   “ Education, Baccalaureate ” ) OR (MM   “ Education, Clinical ” ) OR (MM   “ Teaching Methods, Clinical ” ) OR (MM   “ Teaching Materials, Clinical ” ) OR (MM   “ Practical Nursing ” ) 1. OR 2. OR AND Freetext keywords   Education*, program design, curricul*, teaching method, training, practic*, teach* Outcome MeSH/CINAHL headings   Students dropout/Academic failure/Academic Performance (MM   “ Student Dropouts ” ) OR (MM   “ Academic Failure ” ) OR (MM   “ Academic Performance ” ) 1. OR 2. OR AND Freetext keywords   Attrition, dropout, academic failure, quit, leave, discontinuation, withdrawal  Table 2  Search strategy for Medline via OvidSP. Search strategy used for Medline via OvidSP #1 Students, Nursing/Students, Pre-Nursing/Students, Nursing, Baccalaureate/ Students, Nursing, Practical/Baccalaureate Nurses/Education, Nursing, Baccalaureate #2 (student nurs*, nurs* students, undergraduate nurs*, baccalaureate nurs*).af. #3 Education, Baccalaureate/Education, Clinical/Teaching Methods, Clinical/ Teaching Materials, Clinical/Practical Nursing #4 (education*, program design, curricul*, teaching method, training, practic*, teach*).af. #5 Students dropout/Academic failure/Academic Performance #6 attrition, dropout, academic failure, quit, leave, discontinuation, withdrawal #7 1 OR 2 #8 3 OR 4 #9 5 OR 6 #10 7 and 8 and 9 #11 limit 10 to yr =   “ 1999 – 2018 ”  #12 limit 13 to full text  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  44

Page 5:
Table 3  Appraisal of selected studies. Types of mixed methods study components or primary studies Methodological quality criteria   Yes   No   Can't tell   Comments Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) (Pluye et al., 2011) Screening questions (for all types)   •   Are there clear qualitative and quantitative research questions (or objectives ⁎ ), or a clear mixed methods question (or objective ⁎ )?   16   0  •   Do the collected data allow address the research question (objective)?   16   0 1. Qualitative ( n   = 9) 1.1   Are the sources of qualitative data (archives, documents, informants, observations) relevant to address the research question (objective)? 9   0 1.2   Is the process for analyzing qualitative data relevant to address the research question (objective)?   9   0 1.3   Is appropriate consideration given to how   fi ndings relate to the context, e.g., the setting, in which the data were collected?   8   1 1.4   Is appropriate consideration given to how   fi ndings relate to researchers' in fl uence, e.g., through their interactions with participants?   8   1 2. Quantitative randomized controlled (trials) ( n   = 0) 2.1   Is there a clear description of the randomization (or an appropriate sequence generation)?   0   0 2.2   Is there a clear description of the allocation concealment (or blinding when applicable)?   0   0 2.3   Are there complete outcome data (80% or above)?   0   0 2.4   Is there low withdrawal/drop-out (below 20%)?   0   0 3. Quantitative non-randomized (n = 0) 3.1   Are participants (organizations) recruited in a way that minimizes selection bias?   0   0 3.2   Are measurements appropriate (clear origin, or validity known, or standard instrument; and absence of contamination between groups when appropriate) regarding the exposure/intervention and outcomes? 0   0 3.3   In the groups being compared (exposed vs. non-exposed; with intervention vs. without; cases vs. controls), are the participants comparable, or do researchers take into account (control for) the di ff erence between these groups? 0   0 3.4   Are there complete outcome data (80% or above), and, when applicable, an acceptable response rate (60% or above), or an acceptable follow-up rate for cohort studies (depending on the duration of follow-up)? 0   0 4. Quantitative descriptive (n = 2) 4.1   Is the sampling strategy relevant to address the quantitative research question (quantitative aspect of the mixed methods question)?   2   0 4.2   Is the sample representative of the population understudy?   2   0 4.3   Are measurements appropriate (clear origin, or validity known, or standard instrument)?   2   0 4.4   Is there an acceptable response rate (60% or above)?   2   0 5. Mixed methods (n = 5) 5.1   Is the mixed methods research design relevant to address the qualitative and quantitative research questions (or objectives), or the qualitative and quantitative aspects of the mixed methods question (or objective)? 5   0 5.2   Is the integration of qualitative and quantitative data (or results ⁎ ) relevant to address the research question (objective)?   5   0 5.3   Is appropriate consideration given to the limitations associated with this integration, e.g., the divergence of qualitative and quantitative data (or results ⁎ ) in a triangulation design? 4   1  ⁎   These two items are not considered as double-barreled items since in mixed methods research, (1) there may be research questions (quantitative research) or research objectives (qualitative research), and (2) data may be integrated, and/or qualitative   fi ndings and quantitative results can be integrated.  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  45

Page 6:
Table 4  Characteristics of the included study. Author, year, country Aims   Study design   Sampling i) Sample size ii) Type of participants iii) Gender Data collection method   Data analysis method   Main focus and signi fi cant   fi ndings Abele et al. (2013) US To   fi ll a gap in the literature by speci fi cally examining factors related to attrition among nursing students that are on academic probation Quantitative exploratory Retrospective study i)   n   = 327 ii) Students in traditional BSN or accelerated second-degree nursing program placed on academic probation between 2002 and 2010 iii) Female:249 Male: 78 Retrospective review of an existing student database Logistic regression: a short statistical primer Non-science course such as lifespan developmental psychology and the number of courses failed are signi fi cantly predictive of students' attrition. Andrew et al. (2008) Australia To explore whether students who leave the BN course in the   fi rst semester leave for the same, or di ff erent reasons, than students who leave in the second semester Qualitative descriptive study   i)   n   = 17 ii) Discontinuers in undergraduate BN course iii) Female: 10 Male: 7 Questionnaire and telephone interview Transcribed and analysed employing the method adapted from Co ff ey and Atkinson In the   fi rst semester, students who leave consider themselves unprepared for university and develop a strong dislike of the nursing course. They decide quickly that the course is unsuitable and leave. Those who leave in second semester would prefer to stay but events in their life create a crisis where they can no longer cope with university studies. These students hope to return to nursing whereas students who leave in the   fi rst semester are unlikely to consider returning. Banks et al. (2012) Scotland To explore nursing and midwifery student support needs and their experience of, and satisfaction with, the Pastoral Care Support Advisor service Qualitative and quantitative methods i)   n   = 652 ii) Students from nursing and midwifery and sta ff ; Sta ff   ( n   = 14) and students ( n   = 25) participated in telephone and focus group interviews to express their needs. Two online surveys developed and completed by sta ff   ( n   = 88) and students( n   = 525) iii) Not mention Focus group, telephone interview, face to face interview and survey Descriptive statistics,   t - tests, chi square and ANOVA using SPSS version 15 A majority of sta ff   indicated that students had more complex problems than in the past, and would bene fi t from access to a dedicated source of support. Levels of anxiety and depression among students were found to be above a desirable level, and three quarters of students who completed the survey reported having experienced problems. Some members of sta ff   believed that the PSA had had an impact on attrition, and students that participated reported that they would have left had they not received this support. The PSA service not only bene fi tted the students it also reduced sta ff   time spent with students on non-academic issues. A source of independent support would bene fi t students, university sta ff , and the National Health Service. Bowden (2008) UK To show that the experiences of nursing students who consider leaving but who stay with the course can add to our understanding of attrition in nurse education Qualitative single case study design i)   n   = 93 ii) All nursing students who completed their pre-registration program in one English institution between September 2004 and March 2005 iii) Not clearly indicated Postal questionnaire and face-to-face interviews Thematic analysis   The factors prompted these students leaving are around academic issues, placement issues,   fi nancial issues and personal issues. The factors enabled them to stay are university sta ff , peers, family and friends. Boyle et al. (2008) US To evaluate the e ff ectiveness of a satellite nursing program involving a community healthcare district, a community hospital, a community college, and a state university in Qualitative and quantitative methods i)   n   = 112 ii) Nursing students admitted to the program in fall 2004 and graduated in spring of 2006 Experimental group: the nursing students admitted in the 2-year satellite program No control group Descriptive statistics   The satellite program increased the enrollment of baccalaureate nursing students by 50%. The attrition rate for the   fi rst class is 18.2% when de fi ned in terms of on-time graduation and 6.1% ( continued on next page )  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  46

Page 7:
Table 4   ( continued ) Author, year, country Aims   Study design   Sampling i) Sample size ii) Type of participants iii) Gender Data collection method   Data analysis method   Main focus and signi fi cant   fi ndings enrollment, retention, performance in licensing examination and employment of baccalaureate nursing students iii) Female: 90 Male: 22 when all graduates are included. Comparable attrition rates for California BSN programs are 20.56% for on-time graduation and 10.76% for all graduates. Their work could serve as a model for other collaborative e ff orts to expand nursing education and reduce the shortage of nurses. Brodie et al. (2004) UK To investigate nursing students initial perception and changes of the perceptions after entering the nursing programme. Mixed method: Quantitative questionnaire survey & Qualitative descriptive phenomenology i)   n   = 650 ii) Nursing students (diploma and degree) from two British institutions iii) Not clearly indicated A combined questionnaire (phase 1), interview (phase 2) and focus group (phase 3) Descriptive and inferential statistics & the grounded theory This study found out that the nursing students got unexpected perception towards the programme requirements such as skills, knowledge and attitudes required. The experiences of nursing students presented an image of low- salary and high-workload profession that lacks respect and having disencourage atmosphere. They suggested changes in nursing education at the institutional level to relieve nursing student's burden. Farahani et al. (2017) Iran To elucidate the factors that cause students drop out or a willingness to drop out as viewed by the students Qualitative descriptive study   i)   n   = 19 ii) Students who intended to leave or had already left a nursing school at three nursing colleges in Tehran iii) Not clearly indicated Focus groups, face-to-face semi-structured interviews and observation Conventional content analysis Attrition factors were categorized into two themes:   ‘ before admission ’   and   ‘ after admission ’ . The most signi fi cant factors related to attrition were poor management of nursing workforce, improper supervision, di ff erences between their experiences and expectations and the negative experiences of clinical placement. Glogowska et al. (2007) UK To compare data from semi-structured interviews with students who had withdrawn without completing their program and students who considered leaving, but chose to stay Qualitative study   i)   n   = 49 ii) students from the second year of a pre- registration nursing course and ex- students who withdraw from adult nursing course iii) Female: 47 Male: 2 Questionnaire and semi- structured interview Thematic analysis   The article suggests that decisions to leave are related to culmination of complex interacting factors. Six   ‘ push ’  factors are explored from a group of students: challenges of academic work, burden of other demands,   fi nancial strain, lack of support, negative early experiences and illness/injury.The article also discusses four   ‘ pull ’   factors which make students stay. Adding support for students is considered to be recommendation to meet students' needs. Hamshire et al. (2012) UK To investigate healthcare students' university learning experiences and the circumstances related factors of their attrition. Qualitative descriptive phenomenology i)   n   = 16 ii) Recently discontinued students from nursing programme and allied health professions iii) Female: 14 Male: 2 Telephone interview (narrative inquiry) Framework analysis   Unsatisfactory clinical placement experiences was a frequent trigger to hasten the students' decision to leave. Three themes were identi fi ed as di ffi culties in placements included ine ff ective placement organization such as short notice period and unsupported from mentors, problematic placement journey and disappointing clinical experiences. Thematic analysis ( continued on next page )  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  47

Page 8:
Table 4   ( continued ) Author, year, country Aims   Study design   Sampling i) Sample size ii) Type of participants iii) Gender Data collection method   Data analysis method   Main focus and signi fi cant   fi ndings Hamshire et al. (2013) UK To identify and explore the factors that make students consider leaving their programme and how factors combined Sequential mixed methods design i)   n   = 1080 ii)All students studying on NHS North West commissioned programmes iii) Not clearly indicated Online survey Interviews 465 students (47%) indicated that they had considered leaving. Three theme including dissatisfaction with academic workload and support, di ffi culties associated with clinical placements and personal concerns and challenges were identi fi ed. A signi fi cant number of student comments combined two or more of the themes. Kukkonen et al. (2016) Finland To describe who is a discontinued student in nursing education and the students' own ex-periences of reasons for leaving a nursing school. Qualitative descriptive design   i) n = 25 ii) nursing students who had discontinued their their studies in nursing education program during a single academic year 2009 – 2010 in two di ff erent nursing schools in Finland iii) Female: 22 Male: 3 Semi-structured interviews   Deductive content analysis The results show that the nursing student population is diverse, which has an e ff ect on the students' career intentions, their learning and their ability to cope with studies. In nursing education, it is important to identify students who are at risk of discontinue their studies and develop individual support systems to help nursing students complete their studies and enter into the workforce. Last and Fulbrook (2003) UK To establish a consensus view of the reasons why student nurses were leaving Mixed method: Exploratory (Qualitative) + Delphi study (Quantitative) i)   n   = 50 ii) Student nurses, representing all 3 years of the pre-registration programme, educators, sta ff   nurses, doctors, and managers iii) Not mentioned Focus groups and semi- structured one-to-one interviews +48-statement attitude questionnaire Content analysis   This study suggested that students attrition does not point to only a reason but multiple factors. Placement related experiences, stress and unmet expectations are the examples of factors that contribute cumulatively to students attrition. O'Donnell (2011) UK To identify the reasons for voluntary attrition in pre-registration nursing students Qualitative single case study design i)   n   = 15 ii) Ex-nursing students who had voluntarily withdrawn from a pre- registration nursing program during the period 2004 – 2007 iii) Female: 13 Male: 2 Semi-structured interview   The Cyclical or Interactive Model of qualitative data analysis The study identi fi ed unrealistic student expectations of nursing preparation programmes as a signi fi cant factor in later decisions to voluntarily withdrawal. The study explored the expectations which ex-students had of pre-registration nursing courses prior to entry, the self-assessed in fl uences which shaped prior ex-student expectations and subjective experiences following entry into nursing courses. A signi fi cant number of ex-students had the prior expectation that nursing courses would be largely non-academic and more likely vocational in design and content. Pryjmachuk et al. (2009) UK To identify factors that contribute to students completion rates in pre- registration nursing programme. Quantitative retrospective cohort study i)   n   = 1259 ii) Nursing students from a large English university who commenced their studies between the summer of 2002 and autumn of 2003 iii) Not clearly indicated Routinely collected data   SPSS 2003 for Windows   Students who were older on entry were more likely to complete the programme than younger students, and those who had only the minimum educational quali fi cations on entry were less likely to complete than those with higher-level quali fi cations. The risk for discontinuation increases with taking the child branch, being black/minority. The course structure and support ( continued on next page )  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  48

Page 10:
in the undergraduate nursing programme (Last and Fulbrook, 2003; Glogowska et al., 2007; Wells, 2007; Andrew et al., 2008; O'Donnell, 2011; Banks et al., 2012). A discrepancy in expectations can be in- ferred, since the students expected nursing to be more practical and common-sense in content, while the focus was on academic skills such as referencing and writing, and learning theories and scienti fi c ex- planations. Independent learning was another feature of university learning to which they failed to become accustomed. In Last and Fulbrook's study (2003), the majority of students (91%) felt stressed at the heavy academic workload, and 75% agreed that students left the programme because of an inability to cope with the academic assign- ments. Class sizes and teaching methodologies can also a ff ect the learning experiences of students. For example, overly large classes discourage participation and a ff ect placement opportunities (Last and Fulbrook, 2003). Wells (2007) suggested using anonymous surveys to evaluate the teaching-learning process can improve the quality of the education provided to students and promote their success.  3.6. Policies Related to Clinical Placements  Policies related to clinical placements, which involve unsatisfactory arrangements in the placement and a lack of caring and support, also contribute to high attrition rates. Unsatisfactory arrangements have included unbalanced mentor-student ratios, late noti fi cation of place- ment-related information, inadequate facilities and heavy workloads during the placement, and a lack of communication between clinical placement areas and universities (Hamshire et al., 2012; Hamshire et al., 2013; Farahani et al., 2017; ten Hoeve et al., 2017). The failure to ensure a suitable mentor-student ratio e ff ectively reduces students' learning opportunities in the ward (Farahani et al., 2017). Reviews have shown that students become anxious and confused at sudden changes to their timetables and when given short notice about their placement schedule (Hamshire et al., 2012; ten Hoeve et al., 2017). Facilities to meet the students' basic needs during their clinical place- ment should be arranged by the hospital after communicating with the school. During most placement periods, students have shift working hours. Despite their heavy workload in the hospital, nursing students still have to complete a substantial amount of academic homework (Hamshire et al., 2013). This can a ff ect the students' placement ex- perience and is one of the main reasons for attrition. Insu ffi cient   support   and   care   from   the   school   also   contributes greatly to a negative placement experience. Brodie et al. (2004) re- ported that students often had unfavourable experiences of working with nursing sta ff   and harboured negative feelings about their future career during placements in wards. During their practicum, students need to work individually without a school instructor, which causes them to feel helpless even if they do have a clinical nursing mentor (Farahani et al., 2017). Due to a lack of emotional and practical support from mentors and colleagues, students often feel as if they are not part of the team (O'Donnell, 2011). Also mentioned in some studies are negative attitudes displayed by some mentors during the placement period, such as discouragement, unhelpfulness, and harshness (Brodie et al., 2004; Wells, 2007). For example, nurses might not give the students any instructions on their assignments, might not spare the time to teach them, or might even avoid them. In their study, Banks et al. (2012) found that throughout their training period, the students were left alone in a ward without instructors or were forced to carry out non- professional tasks such as making beds, to reduce the workload of the instructors or to compensate for sta ff   shortages. As a result, students did not get much positive feedback from the nurses, and the atmosphere signi fi cantly reduced their interest in learning.  3.7. Student Support Services  There was an obvious need to provide support services due to the heavy academic workload and stress experienced by the students. Students, particularly   fi rst-year students, need advice and emotional support (Last and Fulbrook, 2003; Hamshire et al., 2013; ten Hoeve et al., 2017). Banks et al. (2012) found that students sought access to support services mainly because of personal, academic,   fi nancial, and placement problems. Lacking support and care from the faculty make students feel not being empathized and not being helped when they got personal issues that a ff ecting their possibility of staying in the pro- gramme (Wells, 2007). The services were highly rated, with more than half of the students indicating that they had enabled students who had considered dropping out to remain in the course. However, such services were not always su ffi cient. Various factors leading   to   insu ffi cient   support   were   identi fi ed.   Last   and   Fulbrook (2003) pointed out that when tutors and clinical sta ff   were in di ff erent geographical locations, students encountered di ffi culties commuting between the two places, which inhibited communication and rapport. The tutors were also not always available, thus, students might have found it di ffi cult to contact them (Glogowska et al., 2007). Hamshire et al. (2012) pointed out that some sta ff   members did not respond to emails or were too busy to spend time supporting students. Students at risk of dropping out would have a better educational experience if the school were to set up a system to identify them (Kukkonen et al., 2016), and follow up with appropriate support ser- vices. Students with di ffi culties also reported that they do not sought help even there are support mechanisms provided by the institutions  Table 5  Nursing curriculum design as a factor to student attrition. Author, Year, Country   Pre-enrolled criteria of recruitting nursing students Curriculum Content   Clinical Placement related policies Student supporting services (e.g. academic support, student advising) Abele et al. (2013) US   ✓  Andrew et al. (2008) Australia   ✓   ✓  Banks et al. (2012) Scotland   ✓   ✓   ✓  Bowden (2008) UK   ✓  Boyle et al. (2008) US   ✓  Brodie et al. (2004) UK   ✓  Farahani et al. (2017) Iran   ✓   ✓  Glogowska et al. (2007) UK   ✓   ✓   ✓  Hamshire et al. (2012) UK   ✓   ✓  Hamshire et al. (2013) UK   ✓   ✓  Kukkonen et al. (2016) Finland   ✓  Last and Fulbrook (2003) UK   ✓   ✓  O'Donnell (2011) UK   ✓   ✓   ✓  Pryjmachuk et al. (2009) UK   ✓   ✓  ten Hoeve et al. (2017) The Netherlands  ✓   ✓  Wells (2007) US   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  50

Page 12:
nursing students (O'Donnell, 2011). To prevent unrealistic expectations, more accurate pre-entry information should be provided to potential students and more comprehensive recruitment strategies should be implemented, such as face-to-face interviews. According to   fi ve studies in this review, a signi fi cant number of nursing students dropped out because of an unsatisfactory clinical ex- perience. The underlying reasons were found to be a lack of support from their mentor, an unfriendly working atmosphere, inadequate skills training, and so on (Hamshire et al., 2012). Collaboration between nursing faculties and those in the clinical   fi eld is of great importance in addressing the problem. It is also the responsibility of nursing faculties to provide more intensive clinical skills training, clinical advice, and emotional support to ensure a satisfactory learning experience. Institutions providing nursing education play a vital role in im- proving both the academic and clinical learning experience of students. A high-quality nursing education would likely lead to a drop in the attrition rate among nursing students, relieving the problem of nursing shortages.  5. Limitations  There are several limitations to this review. The results may not be applicable to all countries, as there may be di ff erences in the design of the nursing curriculum in di ff erent countries, such as in the length of the programme and the composition of the courses, all of which could a ff ect attrition rates. Another limitation that might a ff ect the general- izability of the results is the exclusion of studies targeting accelerated programmes, associate degrees, and nursing schools not a ffi liated with universities. However, the focus on undergraduate nursing programmes ensures that this study is valid with regard to how the design of bac- calaureate nursing programmes in fl uences student attrition. Each study selected participants from their own programme, resulting in students of varying ages, genders, and ethnicities. The heterogeneity of the sample could also limit the generalizability of this study. Moreover, the sample was small in some studies. Of the 16 studies selected for this review, only 8 had a sample larger than 50 students. Furthermore, only publications written in English were selected for this review, potentially leading to bias or causing some potentially valuable studies to be overlooked. Lastly, the criteria for inclusion and exclusion excluded some publications on student retention that might have been partially related to attrition.  6. Conclusion  Attrition in undergraduate nursing programmes was found to be mainly due to several institutional factors, including ine ffi cient support mechanisms,   gap   between   expectations   and   reality,   and   an   un- satisfactory clinical experience. The implication is that e ffi cient support mechanisms such as the provision of mentoring and emotional support could reduce other risk factors of attrition. This review contributes in- sights for developing nursing programmes, suggesting areas in which the design of the undergraduate nursing curriculum could be improved to help students remain in the programme. The result would be to in- crease the long-term nursing workforce, which in turn would lead to the provision of higher-quality patient care and ameliorate the problem of nursing shortages. Further quantitative studies on attrition rates among undergraduate nursing students around the world could be carried out in a standardized manner, so that comprehensive comparisons can be made. More rigorous longitudinal studies to evaluate the e ff ectiveness of changes in curriculum design in relation to attrition rates are war- ranted. Further qualitative studies can be conducted that focus ex- clusively on the issue of how school policies can facilitate student learning in nursing programmes.  7. Recommendations  Although there are complex reasons rather than a single cause for student   attrition,   schools   or   institutions   can   still   implement   some changes   to   retain   undergraduate   nursing   students.   First,   they   can amend their admission requirements to include health-related experi- ence and science courses as prerequisites. Schools can also conduct interviews to assess student motivation and expectations. Student ex- pectations of the nursing curriculum could be modi fi ed by means of open days, school visits, and the provision of career advice with a system for students to give regular feedback. More communication between clinical and teaching sta ff   over policies related to clinical placements, such as relevant arrangements and support systems, could reduce student stress. Adequate supervision can improve the quality of teaching and maximize students' learning experiences in clinical pla- cement. It is essential for students to be able to access support services.  Funding  None.  Con fl ict of Interest  The authors declare that there is no con fl ict of interest.  References  Abele, C., Penprase, B., Ternes, R., 2013. A closer look at academic probation and attri- tion: what courses are predictive of nursing student success? Nurse Educ. Today 33 (3), 258 – 261. American Association of Colleges of Nursing, 2016. Advancing Healthcare Transformation: a new era for Academic Nursing.   Available at: https://www. aacnnursing.org/Portals/42/Publications/AACN-New-Era-Report.pdf, Accessed date: 8 March 2018. Andrew, S., Salamonson, Y., Weaver, R., Smith, A., O'Reilly, R., Taylor, C., 2008. Hate the course or hate to go: semester di ff erences in   fi rst year nursing attrition. Nurse Educ. Today 28 (7), 865 – 872. Banks, P., Kane, H., Rae, C., Atkinson, J., 2012. Support for nursing and midwifery stu- dents: a special case? Nurse Educ. Today 32 (3), 309 – 314. Bowden, J., 2008. Why do nursing students who consider leaving stay on their courses? Nurs. Res. 15 (3), 45 – 58. Boyatzis, R., 1998. Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code Development. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. Boyle, A., Davis, H., Pritchard, H.K., McBride, M., Orsi, A., Scott, S., Kresge, L., 2008. Partnership in action: a satellite program to expand an existing bachelor of science in nursing education program. Nurse Educ. 33 (3), 131 – 136. Braun, V., Clarke, V., 2013. Successful Qualitative Research: a Practical Guide for Beginners. Sage Publications, London. Brodie, D.A., Andrews, G.J., Andrews, J.P., Thomas, G.B., Wong, J., Rixon, L., 2004. Perceptions of nursing: con fi rmation, change and the student experience. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 41 (7), 721 – 733. Brown, J., Marshall, B.L., 2008. A historically black university's baccalaureate enrollment and success tactics for registered nurses. J. Prof. Nurs. 24 (1), 21 – 29. Cameron, J., Roxburgh, M., Taylor, J., Lauder, W., 2011. Why students leave in the UK: an integrative review of the international research literature. J. Clin. Nurs. 20 (7 – 8), 1086 – 1096. Chan, C.K., So, W.K., Fong, D.Y., 2009. Hong Kong baccalaureate nursing students' stress and their coping strategies in clinical practice. J. Prof. Nurs. 25 (5), 307 – 313. Department of Health, 2016. 2016 Manpower Survey on Registered Nurse.   Available at: http://www.dh.gov.hk/english/statistics/statistics_hms/key fi nding_rn16.html, Accessed date: 2 April 2018. Eick, S.A., Williamson, G.R., Heath, V., 2012. A systematic review of placement-related attrition in nurse education. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 49 (10), 1299 – 1309. Farahani, M.A., Gha ff ari, F., Oskouie, F., Tafreshi, M.Z., 2017. Attrition among Iranian nursing students: a qualitative study. Nurse Educ. Pract. 22, 98 – 104. Fowler, J., Norrie, P., 2009. Development of an attrition risk prediction tool. Br. J. Nurs. 18 (19), 1194 – 1200. Galbraith, N.D., Brown, K.E., 2011. Assessing intervention e ff ectiveness for reducing stress in student nurses: quantitative systematic review. J. Adv. Nurs. 67 (4), 709 – 721. Galvin, J., Suominen, E., Morgan, C., O'Connell, E., Smith, A., 2015. Mental health nur- sing students' experiences of stress during training: a thematic analysis of qualitative interviews. J. Psychiatr. Ment. Health Nurs. 22 (10), 773 – 783. Gaynor, L., Gallasch, T., Yorkston, E., Stewart, S., Bogossian, F., Fairweather, C., et al., 2007. The future nursing workforce in Australia: baseline data for a prospective study of the pro fi le, attrition rates and graduate outcomes in a contemporary cohort of undergraduates. Aust. J. Adv. Nurs. 25 (2), 11.  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  52

Page 11:
since the services provided are not famous among students and they perception   towards   the   services   is   negative   (Bowden,   2008). Pryjmachuk et al. (2009) suggested that tutors or teachers in the in- stitution can provide not only academic support but also pastoral sup- port which can prevent students being socially isolated, hence prevent them from dropping out the nursing programme. Institutions should also recognize that social isolation can be problem among students, and provide more resources to support such students.  4. Discussion  4.1. Similarities with the Results of Previous Systematic Reviews  Some of the   fi ndings in this review are similar to those of previous reviews (Stewart et al., 2006; Cameron et al., 2011; Eick et al., 2012; Mooring,   2016).   Di ff erences   in   expectations   have   previously   been identi fi ed as a problem. The public image of a nurse is one who is en- gaged in   ‘ hands on ’   tasks, like a servant instead of a professional. Stu- dents who see nurses as professionals are more likely to leave the programme (Cameron et al., 2011). Also previously identi fi ed are dif- ferences in expectations regarding the learning materials in the course, with some students being unprepared to   fi nd science subjects included in the nursing curriculum (Stewart et al., 2006). The perception of a lack of support has also been found in previous reviews, with Mooring (2016)   fi nding that providing academic advice could help reducing academic   failures.   Likewise,   the   poor   quality   of   some   placements (Cameron et al., 2011) has been found to give some students the im- pression of a lack of support (Eick et al., 2012).  4.2. Di ff erences with the Results of Previous Systematic Reviews  Regarding the issue of attrition among baccalaureate nursing stu- dents, most systematic reviews have focused on demographic and personal factors such as students' characteristics, coping strategies, fa- mily circumstances, and   fi nancial di ffi culties (Cameron et al., 2011; Pitt et al., 2012). However, these factors are unlikely to change within a short period of time. Placement-related experiences, such as a lack of support from clinical sta ff   and an unpleasant learning atmosphere, are common problems (Eick et al., 2012; Merkley, 2015). In fact, these is- sues are related to the design of the undergraduate nursing curriculum, which is a broad topic. Few reviews have focused on the relationship between the design of the nursing curriculum and attrition among un- dergraduate nursing students, which is the aim of this study. Four in- terrelated factors were identi fi ed in this review: admission require- ments,   curriculum   content,   clinical   placement-related   policies,   and student support services. The subject of programme design has been examined, from nursing prerequisites and university courses to ad- ministrative and clinical policies, which concern all nursing students from admission to graduation. Improvements in curriculum design can help students to better arrange their workload so that attrition rates can be reduced.  4.3. Most Important Findings  Urwin et al. (2010) identi fi ed three levels of factors contributing to attrition among nursing students: individual, institutional, and poli- tical. This review highlighted the signi fi cance of institutional-level factors. The results of 16 studies indicated that nursing student attrition is closely related to the policies of nursing faculties. Irrespective of de- mographic and cultural di ff erences, establishing a range of support mechanisms was found to be essential (McKendry et al., 2014). Various attrition risk factors, such as academic failure, poor clinical perfor- mance, and stress, could be ameliorated by e ffi cient support mechan- isms. Moreover, the evidence shows that the gap between expectations of nursing and the reality is a factor contributing to attrition among  Table 6  Reason of attrition. Author, year, country   Content/workload of the course Academic performance/ GPA Clinical experience   Mentoring/support   Disparity between perception and reality/ theory and practice Employment prospect   Financial di ffi culties Abele et al. (2013) US   ✓   ✓  Andrew et al. (2008) Australia   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  Banks et al. (2012) Scotland   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  Bowden (2008) UK   ✓   ✓   ✓  Boyle et al. (2008) US   ✓  Brodie et al. (2004) UK   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  Farahani et al. (2017) Iran   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  Glogowska et al. (2007) UK   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  Hamshire et al. (2012) UK   ✓   ✓  Hamshire et al. (2013) UK   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  Kukkonen et al. (2016) Finland   ✓   ✓  Last and Fulbrook (2003) UK   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  O'Donnell (2011) UK   ✓   ✓  Pryjmachuk et al. (2009) UK   ✓  ten Hoeve et al. (2017) The Netherlands  ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓  Wells (2007) US   ✓   ✓  Z.C.Y. Chan et al.   Nurse Education Today 74 (2019) 41–53  51

