Page 3:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   3 of 23  and the protocol is available from OSF if required (https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/ KCXJ9, accessed on 11 May 2023). Therefore, we developed a protocol that has allowed for uniform criteria to be applied to each of the registries, from the initial search for papers to the inclusion of the final papers.  2.1. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  Based on the research question and following an adaptation of the PICO strategy, a protocol called “d-Cocospe” (documents, concept, context, studies, participants, and evalu- ation) was designed following the indications of various authors, e.g., [27] (see Table 1).  Table 1.   Inclusion and exclusion criteria.  Criteria   Inclusion   Exclusion  Documents (d)   Journal articles, books, book chapters, and doctoral theses Magazine articles, editorials, conferences, etc. Concept (Co)   Academic procrastination   The rest Context (Co)   Academic context   Other contexts (e.g., general, work or health procrastination) Studies (s)   Empirical studies   Theoretical reviews and case studies Participants (p)   Students under 18 years   University students or community samples Evaluation (e) Behavioral or reported procrastination measures (i.e., self-reports or hetero reports) Single-item instruments or unstructured instruments  2.1.1. Documents Both periodical (journal articles) and non-periodical (books, book chapters, and doc- toral theses) publications were included. Magazine articles, editorials, conferences, and other similar types of documents were excluded. 2.1.2. Concept The focus of the study was on publications in which academic procrastination was assessed. 2.1.3. Context The study focused specifically on publications that assessed academic procrastination within an academic context. As a result, publications on general procrastination or on procrastination in other contexts (such as work, health, or leisure activities) were excluded. 2.1.4. Studies Empirical studies were included and theoretical studies, literature reviews, and case studies were not considered. 2.1.5. Participants The study subjects were exclusively students under 18 years and publications that included university students, community samples or those that did not specify the age or educational level of the participants were discarded. 2.1.6. Evaluation Empirical studies in which the sample size and mode of assessment of procrastination was explicitly stated were included, if procrastination was assessed by behavioral or reported procrastination measures (i.e., self-reports or hetero reports). On the other hand, publications where procrastination was assessed by single-item instruments or unstructured instruments were excluded.

Page 4:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   4 of 23  2.2. Search Strategy  The search equation was developed by the authors (MPGB, ASEP, and MALG) through initial exploratory searches in collaboration with expert documentalists from the Universi- dad Nacional de Educaci ó n a Distancia (UNED). The final search was constructed by applying Boolean operators (AND & OR) and truncation (* and inverted commas) in TI, AB, KW: (“academic procrast*” OR “student procrast*”) AND (child* OR adolesc* OR young OR teen* OR school OR infan* OR boy* OR girl* OR junior OR kid)] including publications up to December 2022. In the ProQuest database, NOFT was used: [(“academic procrast*” OR “student procrast*”) AND (child* OR adolesc* OR young OR teen* OR school OR infan* OR boy* OR girl* OR junior OR kid)]. For WoS, the search was executed in TOPIC: [(“academic procrast*” OR “student procrast*”) AND (child* OR adolesc* OR young OR teen* OR school OR infan* OR boy* OR girl* OR junior OR kid)] including publications up to December 2022.  2.3. Sources of Information  The documentary search was carried out in July 2022. Subsequently, in March 2023, the references were updated, and the records found up to December 2022 were included to replicate the search and incorporate new records. 2.3.1. Formal Strategies The records were obtained through different sources of information. First, 11 auto- mated databases were consulted: (a) Thematic databases in the areas of Psychology and Education: ERIC, MedLine, Psychology and Behavioral Sciences Collection, PsycINFO, PubPsych, and Teacher Reference Center, and (b) multidisciplinary: Academic Search Ultimate, E-Journals, ProQuest, Scopus, and Web of Science. The search was conducted without language restrictions. Second, the search was complemented by consulting documents located in different international repositories, such as Redined, Cogprints, Zenodo, BASE, NDLTD Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations, OAIster, and arxiv. Bibliographic references were also analyzed to identify possible publications. 2.3.2. Informal Strategies Academic social networks (e.g., ResearchGate, academia.edu, Dimensions, etc.) were also explored to locate publications by relevant researchers in the field. 2.3.3. Retrospective Strategies The search was complemented by analysis of systematic reviews and meta-analyses to retrieve potentially relevant articles. The searches were conducted without applying language restrictions to control for possible linguistic bias. In this regard, online translation (DeepL and Google Translator) of the original documents was used when necessary (e.g., texts in Turkish, Farsi, Chinese, Indonesian, etc.).  2.4. Coding and Identification of Records and Data Extraction  All records obtained from each database were exported to separate libraries in the EndNote 20.5 software package. EndNote 20.5 allowed for the files to be merged into a single library, which facilitated the removal of duplicate items. The records were then exported to a shared spreadsheet in Google Drive, in order that the authors could work collaboratively. After several online meetings, a protocol was established to create the analysis fields for processing each record (data charting). Then, a series of bibliometric data were included: (a) Year of publication; (b) authorship; (c) title; (d) journal or book name; (e) DOI; and (f) abstract. In addition, several enriched fields were added in accordance with the d-Cocospe format: (a) Document typology: Journal articles, books, book chapters, theses, etc.; (b) Concept: It was specified whether the document dealt with procrastina-

Page 5:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   5 of 23  tion. If this concept was not attended, the topic of analysis was specified; (c) Context: In each record it was indicated whether procrastination was confined to the academic field, otherwise, the specific context was indicated; (d) Study: The type of study was indicated, specifying whether it was an empirical study, theoretical study, review or case study; (e) Participants: The following information was collected: (i) Number of participants in the study; (ii) type of participants: Students, general population, young volunteers, etc.; (iii) ed- ucation level: Primary education (children aged 6–7 to 11–12) or secondary education (students aged 12 to 17–18); (iv) educational grade or rank; and (v) geographical origin of the sample; (f) Evaluation: Information on the assessment instrument used to measure aca- demic procrastination was included; (g) Type of design: Experimental, quasi-experimental, ex post facto or observational; (h) Type of intervention: Content of the interventions, type of format (individual vs. group), intervention setting, structure of each session, and record of measures taken; (i) Analyzed variables: The variables analyzed were categorized ac- cording to different domains: Sociodemographic domain, learning domain, health domain, relational domain, and intrapersonal domain; (j) Outcomes; and (k) Conclusions in relation to academic procrastination. During the coding and data extraction process, regular meetings were held to discuss inconsistencies, doubts, and disagreements. Each reference was independently analyzed by two researchers (MPGB and MALG), and both relevant and non-relevant records were recorded, in order that all the items were coded after reading the title, abstract, and full text. The next phase of the review consisted of leading two types of analysis: (a) Thematic content analysis of the variables, and (b) classification of experimental interventions based on the analysis of the variables under study. To carry out the thematic content analysis, a sequential procedure was followed: (a) Generation of a list of variables measured in the documents’ titles, abstracts, and full texts; (b) configuration of initial categories (a posteriori) through inductive analysis; (c) creation of a category tree, grouping them into conceptual families; and (d) re-labeling and reducing categories to a more inclusive level. The intervention classification was carried out by categorizing the fields where the intervention was directed. Then, for each study, the type of technique or program imple- mented was collected. The type of design, variables, and most relevant results obtained were recorded. Finally, we present the results using summary tables and figures created with Microsoft Excel (version 16.7), MapChart, MIRO (online whiteboard), and Infogram, along with a narrative description of the main findings.  3. Results  3.1. Production and Evolution of Publications  The search strategies allowed us to identify 1185 documents, of which 79 met the criteria for inclusion, representing 6.67% of the initial records. Figure 2 shows the entire process carried out from the selection of formal and informal strategies used, as well as the number of records and the reasons for inclusion and exclusion of each document in each phase of the screening process. On the other hand, Figure 3 shows the diachronic evolution of publications on aca- demic procrastination in students under 18 years of age.   The first selected work was published in 1995, although the evolution of publications has been irregular until the last 15 years, with the peak of records in 2021 with 15 documents.

Page 6:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   6 of 23 Children   2023 ,   10 , x FOR PEER REVIEW   6 of 23  Figure 2.   Flowchart of the review process.   The literature search has been conducted using for- mal strategies (automated databases and references from selected documents), informal strategies (academic social networks) and retrospective strategies [4,28–31].

Page 8:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   8 of 23 Children   2023 ,   10 , x FOR PEER REVIEW   7   of   22  Figure 4.   Infographic: Summary of study methodology.  Figure 4.   Infographic: Summary of study methodology.

Page 13:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   13 of 23  pared to Western ones. This imbalance is even more pronounced if we consider that there is an Anglo-Saxon bias in the location of international literature in this review. Within the methodological aspects, the analysis of the measurement instruments used to assess academic procrastination in students under 18 years revealed that many of the scales commonly used have not been specifically created for this age group [ 40   ]. This can represent a methodological limitation and a challenge when interpreting results. This highlights the need to reflect on more appropriate evaluation methods for children. For example, the development of observational scales could be a promising approach. Recording the third objective, which aimed to conduct a content analysis to categorize the correlates investigated in relation to academic procrastination and determine the types of interventions reported, four topics were identified. The content analysis yielded four top- ics, including constructs related to self-regulated learning [   95 ,   96   ] and a range of personality, motivational, e.g., [   97   ], and emotional variables [   98 ,   99   ], which were expected to be present. Additionally, a third topic emerged concerning the relationships established with signifi- cant individuals and the influence of specific variables, such as parenting style, excessive demands, and overprotection on the development of autonomy and self-control in children. Furthermore, an existing but less developed topic pertains to the relationship between procrastination and physical and mental health variables. While this is an emerging area, likely linked to post-pandemic studies, it requires greater attention. We cannot forget that this relationship has been well-studied in academic procrastination in adults [22,82]. The intervention studies reviewed, despite being scarce, show great methodological diversity in terms of sample size and characteristics (e.g., exclusively girls), making it impossible to draw conclusions on effectiveness.   This, however, goes beyond the scope of this review. Nevertheless, given the insufficient number of studies found and the methodological problems detected, we can conclude that we are not yet close to conducting a meta-analysis focused exclusively on this age group and being able to answer specific questions. Building on the previous discussion, we cannot only consider methodological issues related to assessing procrastination in children or the variables that explain the complexity of the construct, but also broader questions such as: What are the limits of the concept of procrastination in childhood? What is the alternative or competing behavior to completing necessary and obligatory tasks in children? Can we say that a child who is playing rather than doing their homework is procrastinating? On the other hand, should we ask ourselves if an inactive child who is not playing is also procrastinating? We believe that one of the important tasks of childhood is the development of play, pleasure, and a sense of fun, and we wonder when the “obligation of tasks” begins to give way to procrastination. The role of school in this regard seems to be very relevant, and it is logical to think that they have the possibility to detect and intervene early. Is there procrastination in a childhood free of mandatory tasks? We can evoke hun- dreds of images of children demanding constant activity and insatiable curiosity. At what point, and due to what factors, does learning—or its tasks—become “procrastinatable”? The analyzed studies do not address these issues. They also do not study, longitudi- nally, the transition through the stages or levels of study and the adaptation to the different changes and growing demands for autonomy, and how they impact procrastination behav- ior. In studies with university students, the relationship between academic procrastination and the change in the educational system has been discussed: The autonomy granted by higher education can be a stressor or a promoter of excessive flexibility, which in turn, may favor the emergence of procrastination behavior. In this regard, special attention has been paid to integration during the first year, due to the high dropout rates observed in this course and its relationship with academic self-efficacy, e.g., [ 97   ], use of self-regulation strategies, academic engagement, e.g., [ 100   ], and academic burnout, e.g., [   101   ]. It is valid to question whether throughout primary and secondary education, the processes of change and transition between these systems present, in a similar way to what has been studied in university samples, critical moments related to the loss of self-regulatory processes and the

Page 1:
Citation:   González-Brignardello, M.P.; Sánchez-Elvira Paniagua, A.; López-González, M.Á. Academic Procrastination in Children and Adolescents: A Scoping Review.  Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016.   https:// doi.org/10.3390/children10061016 Academic Editors: Mar í a Elena Parra-Gonz á lez and Adri á n Segura-Robles Received: 12 May 2023 Revised: 28 May 2023 Accepted: 29 May 2023 Published: 5 June 2023  Copyright:   © 2023 by the authors. Licensee   MDPI,   Basel,   Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed   under   the   terms   and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/). children  Systematic Review  Academic Procrastination in Children and Adolescents: A Scoping Review  Marcela Paz Gonz á lez-Brignardello   1   , Angeles S á nchez-Elvira Paniagua   1   and M.   Á ngeles L ó pez-Gonz á lez   2, *  1   Department of Personality Psychology, Psychological Assessment and Treatment, Faculty of Psychology, Universidad Nacional de Educaci ó n a Distancia, UNED, 28040 Madrid, Spain; mpgonzalez@psi.uned.es (M.P.G.-B.); asanchez-elvira@psi.uned.es (A.S.-E.P.)  2   Psychology Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, 28922 Madrid, Spain  *   Correspondence: angeles.lopezg@urjc.es  Abstract:   Academic procrastination is a persistent behavior in students’ academic development consisting of postponing or delaying the completion of necessary tasks and having a deadline for completion, which is associated with detriment in performance, school dropout, and loss of student well-being. The largest body of existing knowledge on this behavior comes from studies conducted with university students, although it is necessary to deepen the findings obtained at lower educational levels. The aim of this work has been to carry out a scoping review of the empirical publications focused on academic procrastination in children and adolescents.   The inclusion and exclusion criteria are detailed following the general guidelines of the Joanna Briggs Institute. However, some modifications are incorporated in the flowchart to guide the review sequence.   The search was conducted in eleven thematic (ERIC, MedLine, Psychology and Behavioral Sciences Collection, PsycINFO, PubPsych, and Teacher Reference Center) and multidisciplinary databases (Academic Search Ultimate, E-Journals, ProQuest, Scopus, and Web of Science) to identify relevant publications up to 2022, including grey literature. Out of the initial 1185 records screened, a total of 79 records were selected. The search results included a total of 79 records. The most used assessment instruments, the most studied variables, and the type of design and sources of information used in the selected studies are detailed. Cultural aspects that open new lines of future research are identified.  Keywords:   academic procrastination; student procrastination; children; adolescents; school; scoping review  1. Introduction  Procrastination is a very common and pervasive behavior in different areas of human activity. It involves the intentional delay of actions and behaviors that have a time limit within which they should be completed [ 1 , 2 ]. There is a tendency to assume that everyone procrastinates or delays some necessary activity (e.g., medical appointments, exercise, paying fines, going to bed, among many other possible activities). However, to the extent that this behavior occurs on a frequent basis, it has consequences for those who engage in it, and may even affect others if it occurs, for example, in work or collaborative learning environments. Contrary to popular belief, people who engage in this behavior have a desire to complete tasks or actions, but have difficulty in translating these intentions into implementation actions, initiation, and completion [3]. Procrastination is a complex, poorly understood behavior that involves different cognitive, emotional, and behavioral components [   4   – 6 ]. It has been understood as a failure of self-regulation [ 4 ], an avoidance behavior toward unpleasant tasks [   7   ], due to fear of failure [   8   ], fear of success [ 9 ], or an expression of poor action control [ 9   ], and it has been consistently associated with low self-efficacy, e.g., [10]. Academic procrastination, a type of domain-specific behavior, refers to the tendency of students to delay or postpone completing academic tasks, such as studying for an  Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016. https://doi.org/10.3390/children10061016   https://www.mdpi.com/journal/children

Page 2:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   2 of 23  exam, doing homework, or writing an essay, even though they know they should perform these actions and have a specific deadline for completion. Academic procrastination has garnered significant attention from researchers, primarily due to two factors: (a) Its high prevalence among university students and, on the other hand, (b) the ease of access to samples of students. Approximately 80% of college students are estimated to procrastinate, making it one of the most prevalent issues among post-secondary students, with estimates ranging from 10% to 70% [ 11   ,   12 ]. Contrary to the previous statement, little research has been conducted to understand the characteristics of procrastination in younger age groups, e.g., [   13   ]. However, researchers became interested in studying the behavior of children and adolescents during the prolonged periods of confinement due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Research in relation to procrastination focused primarily on the significant increase in the use of electronic devices and social media, as well as the procrastination of academic activities that were mandatory online during that period, e.g., [14–16]. Academic procrastination leads to a decline in students’ well-being.   It has been associated with poor academic performance [   17   ], emotional distress (stress, anxiety, and depression) [18–20], and physical health deterioration, e.g., [21,22]. One of the many unanswered questions regarding academic procrastination pertains to its development in students.   Is academic procrastination a behavioral pattern that develops at an early age, or does it emerge as a reaction or response as students face the transition to university level? If the behavior does develop at an early age, what is its prevalence in primary and secondary education, what role do parents and the education system play in the development of the problem, and are there interventions to change children’s procrastinating behavior? If so, what factors are involved in promoting change? The aim of this work has been to carry out a panoramic review of the empirical publications focused on academic procrastination in children and adolescents. We propose a scoping review that will also allow us: (a) To identify the production and evolution of publications on academic procrastination in primary and secondary education; (b) to specify the methodological basic characteristics of the studies; (c) to conduct a content analysis to categorize the correlates investigated in relation to academic procrastination in this age group and to determine the types of interventions reported (see Figure 1). The ultimate goal, which is the essence of a systematic scoping review, is to detect gaps in research to contribute to future lines of inquiry. Children   2023 ,   10 , x FOR PEER REVIEW   2 of 23 Academic procrastination, a type of domain-speci fi c behavior, refers to the tendency of students to delay or postpone completing academic tasks, such as studying for an exam, doing homework, or writing an essay, even though they know they should perform these actions and have a speci fi c deadline for completion. Academic procrastination has garnered signi fi cant a tt ention from researchers, primarily due to two factors: (a) Its high prevalence among university students and, on the other hand, (b) the ease of access to samples   of   students.   Approximately   80%   of   college   students   are   estimated   to procrastinate, making it one of the most prevalent issues among post-secondary students, with estimates ranging from 10% to 70% [11,12]. Contrary to the previous statement, li tt le research has been conducted to understand the characteristics of procrastination in younger age groups, e.g., [13]. However, researchers became interested in studying the behavior of children and adolescents during the prolonged periods of con fi nement due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Research in relation to procrastination focused primarily on the signi fi cant increase in the use of electronic devices and social media, as well as the procrastination of academic activities that were mandatory online during that period, e.g., [14–16]. Academic procrastination leads to a decline in students’ well-being. It has been associated with poor academic performance [17], emotional distress (stress, anxiety, and depression) [18–20], and physical health deterioration, e.g., [21,22]. One of the many unanswered questions regarding academic procrastination pertains to its development in students. Is academic procrastination a behavioral pa tt ern that develops at an early age, or does it emerge as a reaction or response as students face the transition to university level? If the behavior does develop at an early age, what is its prevalence in primary and secondary education, what role do parents and the education system play in the development of the problem, and are there interventions to change children’s procrastinating behavior? If so, what factors are involved in promoting change? The aim of this work has been to carry out a panoramic review of the empirical publications focused on academic procrastination in children and adolescents. We propose a scoping review that will also allow us: (a) To identify the production and evolution   of   publications   on   academic   procrastination   in   primary   and   secondary education; (b) to specify the methodological basic characteristics of the studies; (c) to conduct a content analysis to categorize the correlates investigated in relation to academic procrastination in this age group and to determine the types of interventions reported (see Figure 1). The ultimate goal, which is the essence of a systematic scoping review, is to detect gaps in research to contribute to future lines of inquiry.  Figure 1.   Flowchart of the speci fi c objectives.  Figure 1.   Flowchart of the specific objectives.  2. Method  Following the methodology implemented in previous studies [   23   ,   24 ], this review includes several control mechanisms designed to reduce any bias that may exist a priori, as suggested by the PRISMA-ScR [ 25 ] (see Appendix A) and the JBI Evidence Synthesis Manual [ 26   ]. The study was registered in the international registry for overview reviews

Page 7:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   7 of 23 academic procrastination in students under 18 years of age. The   fi rst selected work was published in 1995, although the evolution of publications has been irregular until the last 15 years, with the peak of records in 2021 with 15 documents. A   comparison   is   made   between   the   initially   retrieved   publications   and   the documents   fi nally included. Similarly, the three publications with the highest number of citations in the Web of Science database in 2023 are labeled and the only experimental studies conducted to date are marked.  Figure 3.   Diachronic evolution of the literature on academic procrastination in children and adolescents. In this graphic, it have been indicated the most cited references [32–34].  3.2. Characteristics of the Studies  Using   the   prototypical   structure   of   the   “Methods”   section   of   any   scienti fi c publication,   the   characteristics   of   the   studies   are   presented   below:   Participants, assessment, and type of design (see Appendix B). 3.2.1. Participants In terms of sample size, a total of 34,563 participants were counted, with an average per study equal to 437.5 students (min. = 5 and max. = 1509); out of these, 8.86% were primary school students (participants in seven studies) and the rest, 91.14%, were secondary school students. In total,   fi ve of the studies analyzed had all-girl samples, e.g., [35–39] and one of them was aimed at studying academic procrastination in girls with learning disabilities, e.g., [38] (see Figure 4 for details).  Figure 3.   Diachronic evolution of the literature on academic procrastination in children and adoles- cents. In this graphic, it have been indicated the most cited refs. [32–34].  A comparison is made between the initially retrieved publications and the documents finally included. Similarly, the three publications with the highest number of citations in the Web of Science database in 2023 are labeled and the only experimental studies conducted to date are marked.  3.2. Characteristics of the Studies  Using the prototypical structure of the “Methods” section of any scientific publication, the characteristics of the studies are presented below: Participants, assessment, and type of design (see Appendix B). 3.2.1. Participants In terms of sample size, a total of 34,563 participants were counted, with an average per study equal to 437.5 students (min. = 5 and max. = 1509); out of these, 8.86% were primary school students (participants in seven studies) and the rest, 91.14%, were secondary school students. In total, five of the studies analyzed had all-girl samples, e.g., [ 35   –   39   ] and one of them was aimed at studying academic procrastination in girls with learning disabilities, e.g., [38] (see Figure 4 for details). Regarding the geographical distribution of the samples, Figure 5 specifies the number of publications in each of the continents and countries. Moreover, it lists the countries in which experimental and quasi-experimental studies have been carried out. 3.2.2. Instruments for Assessing Academic Procrastination In Table 2, the 26 different assessment tools used in the retrieved documents are shown. In general, these are specific questionnaires and scales directly applied to children and adolescents (self-reports), although the participation of parents and teachers (hetero reports) is also reported.

Page 9:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   9 of 23 Children   2023 ,   10 , x FOR PEER REVIEW   9 of 23 Regarding the geographical distribution of the samples, Figure 5 speci fi es the number of publications in each of the continents and countries. Moreover, it lists the countries in which experimental and quasi-experimental studies have been carried out.  Figure 5.   Geographical distribution of samples in studies on academic procrastination in children and adolescents. Note: It should be highlighted that the number of publications does not correspond to the   fi nal count due to the presence of a cross-cultural study which includes two di ff erent countries. 3.2.2. Instruments for Assessing Academic Procrastination In Table 2, the 26 di ff erent assessment tools used in the retrieved documents are shown. In general, these are speci fi c questionnaires and scales directly applied to children and adolescents (self-reports), although the participation of parents and teachers (hetero reports) is also reported.  Table 2.   Recount of instruments used.  Instrument   Count  Procrastination Assessment Scale-Student—PASS (Solomon and Rothblum, 1984 [40])   23 Academic Procrastination Scale—AP-S (Çak c , 2003 [41])   10 Tuckman Procrastination Scale—TPS (Tuckman, 1991 [40])   8 Aitken Procrastination Inventory—API (Aiken, 1982 [42])   5 General Procrastination Scale—GPS (Lay, 1986 [43])   5 Escala de Procrastinación Académica—EPA (Busko, 1998 [44])   4 Academic Procrastination Questionnaire (Huang, 2009 [45])   2 Scale developed by authors (Die tz   et al., 2007 [46])   3 Academic Procrastination Scale—APS-S (McCloskey, 2011 [47])   2 Academic Procrastination Inventory for Middle School Students—API-MSS (Zuo, 2020 [48])   1 Academic Procrastination Questionnaire (Ran, H., 2010 [49])   1 Academic Procrastination Scale—MSLQ (Lay and Silverman, 1996 [50])   1 Academic Procrastination Scale—APS (Lay, 1986 [43])   1 Academic Procrastination Student Form—APS (Milgram and Amir, 1998 [32])   1  Figure 5.   Geographical distribution of samples in studies on academic procrastination in children and adolescents. Note: It should be highlighted that the number of publications does not correspond to the final count due to the presence of a cross-cultural study which includes two different countries.  Table 2.   Recount of instruments used.  Instrument   Count  Procrastination Assessment Scale-Student—PASS (Solomon and Rothblum, 1984 [40])   23 Academic Procrastination Scale—AP-S (Çakıcı, 2003 [41])   10 Tuckman Procrastination Scale—TPS (Tuckman, 1991 [40])   8 Aitken Procrastination Inventory—API (Aiken, 1982 [42])   5 General Procrastination Scale—GPS (Lay, 1986 [43])   5 Escala de Procrastinaci ó n Acad é mica—EPA (Busko, 1998 [44])   4 Academic Procrastination Questionnaire (Huang, 2009 [45])   2 Scale developed by authors (Dietz et al., 2007 [46])   3 Academic Procrastination Scale—APS-S (McCloskey, 2011 [47])   2 Academic Procrastination Inventory for Middle School Students—API-MSS (Zuo, 2020 [48])   1 Academic Procrastination Questionnaire (Ran, H., 2010 [49])   1 Academic Procrastination Scale—MSLQ (Lay and Silverman, 1996 [50])   1 Academic Procrastination Scale—APS (Lay, 1986 [43])   1 Academic Procrastination Student Form—APS (Milgram and Amir, 1998 [   32 ])   1 Academic Procrastination Survey (Savari, K., 2011 [51])   1 Cuestionario de Procrastinaci ó n en el Estudio (CPE; Ros á rio et al., [52])   3 Irrational Procrastination Scale—IPS (Steel, 2010 [53])   1 Melbourne Decision Making Questionnaire (five items procrastination) (Mann et al., 1997 [54])   1 Scale developed by authors (Depreeuw and Lens, 1998 [55])   2 Scale developed by authors (Santyasa et al., 2020 [56])   1 Scale developed by authors (Shih, 2016 [57]) Scale developed by authors (Ocak and Karatas, 2019 [58])   1 Academic Procrastination Scale—DPS (Ferrari et al., 1995 [13])   1 Total   79

Page 10:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   10 of 23  The authors indicate that the instruments used were adapted to the language of the sample; however, they are not questionnaires created specifically for children and adolescents, but mostly validated scales in university students that are also applied in individuals under 18 years old. The most used instrument is the Procrastination Assessment Scale-Student/PASS, but typically only the first part of the scale, which is designed to measure the frequency of procrastination, is utilized. 3.2.3. Methodology of the Studies and Type of Design In 97.47% of the studies, a quantitative methodology was employed, while 2.53% utilized qualitative or mixed method approaches. Regarding the design of quantitative studies, 86.07% were ex post facto designs (with an average sample size of 458.64 students), encompassing correlational or group comparison analyses. Additionally, 11.39% of the studies were experimental and quasi-experimental designs, including six randomized controlled trials (RCTs), two randomized non-controlled trials (RNCTs), and one pre- experimental study, with an average sample size of 197.5 students (see Figure 4). Within the ex post facto studies, correlation and regression analyses were predominantly observed, with a recent emergence of analyses based on structural equation modeling (SEM) in recent years. Regarding studies that incorporate qualitative methodology, they have focused on children’s opinions about behaviors related to procrastination. In one of them [   59   ], children were asked about the reasons for procrastination, strategies to avoid it, and suggestions to reduce this behavior.   In this sense, boys mentioned playing computer games as a substitute behavior for studying, while girls preferred activities, such as reading books. The problematic use of mobile phones and the internet has also been studied (e.g., [ 59   ]). In this case, students considered access to information as a positive aspect of using the internet, and time loss as a negative aspect.  3.3. Content Analysis  3.3.1. Investigated Correlates The thematic content analysis reveals four main dimensions: Parental and teacher variables (teacher and family), personal variables (sociodemographic, personality, mo- tivation, emotional/affective), mental and well-being (psychopathology, alternative or competitive behaviors, and well-being and quality of life), and variables of the learning cycle (self-regulated learning strategies, performance, and school). In Figure 6, the set of variables analyzed in the documents (i.e., those that have been measured) is detailed. The most studied variables correspond to dimensions related to the learning cycle, and self-regulated learning occupied the focus of most of this dimension. Thirty-four studies focused on variables related to this process, specifically self-regulated learning, e.g., [ 60   – 62   ], time management, e.g., [   57 ,   63   , 64   ], and inattention or management of distractions, e.g., [   62   , 65   ]. Regarding previous learning experience and performance [   33 ], we analyzed the role of experience in receiving low grades on exams and assignments and its relationship with academic procrastination. All studies that included performance and academic achievement variables, a total of 22, e.g., [ 52   , 66   ,   67 ] were included in this category. On the other hand, studies that relate personality variables to academic procrastination are also among the most numerous, with a total of 31, highlighting self-efficacy or self-efficacy beliefs, e.g., [ 62 , 68 – 72 ], perfectionism, e.g., [ 57 , 68 , 73 – 75 ], and self-esteem, e.g., [ 33 , 67 ]. Other less common constructs are resilience, locus of control, and persistence. The relationship between emotional and affective variables with academic procrasti- nation was studied in 11 publications, with test anxiety being the most frequent variable, e.g., [   75   ]; but not only related to evaluation, but also general academic anxiety, anxiety in the study process or for specific subjects, e.g., [32,76].

Page 11:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   11 of 23 relationship   between   academic   procrastination   and   these   types   of   behaviors,   e.g., [14,16,80,81]. Among the retrieved documents, there are also publications that study academic procrastination in the context of psychopathology, such as three studies that analyze procrastination behavior associated with addictive behaviors related to the internet, use of social networks, and electronic devices, e.g., [82–84], social anxiety disorder [80,82], and obsessive-compulsive symptoms [70].  Figure 6.   Categories and analyzed variables. 3.3.2. Types of Interventions Regarding the retrieved experimental studies and considering the intervention area, a total of nine studies were selected. These studies can be classi fi ed, according to their  Figure 6.   Categories and analyzed variables.  A specific area of study in this population of children and adolescents is parental support and the development of autonomy; a total of 18 publications analyzed variables related to the quality of parental relationships, parenting style, and parental involvement in education, e.g., [ 72 ,   76   – 79   ], attention to the promotion of autonomy or excessive parental control, e.g., [78,79]. Alternative behaviors to studying, such as mobile phone use or internet browsing, have also been of interest to researchers, with nine publications dedicated to exploring the relation- ship between academic procrastination and these types of behaviors, e.g., [14,16,80,81]. Among the retrieved documents, there are also publications that study academic procrastination in the context of psychopathology, such as three studies that analyze procrastination behavior associated with addictive behaviors related to the internet, use of social networks, and electronic devices, e.g., [   82 –   84   ], social anxiety disorder [ 80   , 82   ], and obsessive-compulsive symptoms [70]. 3.3.2. Types of Interventions Regarding the retrieved experimental studies and considering the intervention area, a total of nine studies were selected. These studies can be classified, according to their practical perspective, as follows: Healthcare (1); educational (2); psychoeducational (4); psychotherapeutic (1); and mixed (1). From a broad socio-sanitary perspective, with an emphasis on child health within social, family, and educational context, Kocoglu and Emiro  ̆ glu [   85   ] studied the impact of a school nursing service on the academic performance of 4th-grade students. The authors reported an increase in academic performance, while decreasing absenteeism and academic procrastination behaviors. On the other hand, from an educational framework, Santyasa et al. [ 56   ] compared two teaching methods in two groups of students: A project-based learning (PjBL) model and a direct instruction (DI) model. They found that the project-based method improved academic performance, but this occurred primarily in the group of students with low levels of academic procrastination. From the same perspective, Dong and Izadpanah [   35   ] com- pared the effect of corrective feedback after formative feedback in an experimental group with control group (women), obtaining improvement in academic resilience, educational belonging, and reduction in procrastination compared to the control group.

Page 12:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   12 of 23  From a psycho-educational framework, Ghadampour [   86   ] trained a group of female students in learning strategies (cognitive and metacognitive): The experimental group showed a reduction in procrastination and an increase in self-efficacy that was maintained during the follow-up phase, with significantly differential effects compared to the control group without intervention. Additionally, Motie [   87   ] reported a study based on training in self-regulated learning strategies (boys) in an experimental group design with a control group, which resulted in a decrease in procrastination behavior in the experimental group. Moreover, from the psycho-educational framework, Jaradat [   88 ] reported a study based on three groups: One assigned to cognitive therapy, study skills counseling, and a control group (waiting list). The two experimental groups improved satisfaction with studying in the post-test. The study skills counseling group showed a greater reduction in academic procrastination than the CT group, which decreased exam anxiety but not procrastination. Finally, Yildiz and Iskender [   89   ] implemented a psycho-educational program aimed at secure attachment style in a control group (13 years old) that decreased intolerance of uncertainty and academic procrastination in the experimental group, compared to the control group without intervention, with effects that persisted after the program ended. From a clinical psychological perspective, Lubis and Djuwita [ 37   ] intervened online and in a group format, through a CBT program aimed at academic procrastination, with five girls during the COVID-19 pandemic, with a pre-post and follow-up design. The authors reported that the intervention decreased levels of procrastination. From a mixed perspective, Kheirkhah [   36   ] trained girls in self-efficacy and learning strategies during eight sessions. The intervention significantly decreased procrastination compared to the control group without intervention.  4. Discussion  The aim of this work has been to carry out a scoping review of the empirical publica- tions focused on academic procrastination in children and adolescents. Regarding the first objective, which aims to identify the production and evolution of publications on academic procrastination in primary and secondary education, the results indicate a lack of significant interest from researchers in this topic. In contrast to academic procrastination in university students [ 17   , 29   ,   90 –   92 ], there has been a clear increase in the number of publications since 2020. In fact, 45.5% of the retrieved records are dated after this year. It is worth noting that 2020 was the year of the pandemic, with widespread confinement and the consequent implementation of online education systems at all levels [   93   ], as well as a significant rise in the use of social media. Therefore, it is highly likely that this newfound interest has been influenced by the circumstances that occurred. Only time will tell if this trend continues in the coming years. Regarding the second objective of identifying the common methodological charac- teristics of the studies, the most relevant data showed that academic procrastination has been predominantly studied in secondary education (92%). In terms of sample sizes, it is noteworthy that 90% of the studies were conducted with very large (>1000) or large (>350 students) samples. It is striking that only 11.4% of the studies were experimental in nature; the majority of the research has focused on exploring relationships between vari- ables. Hopefully, in the future, there will be initiatives aimed at detecting and specifically intervening in this age group. A high proportion of the retrieved studies came from Eastern countries, with a very limited presence of studies from Europe and America. These findings are similar to those reported by Lu et al. [   40   ], in their meta-analysis on sociodemographic characteristics and procrastination, the authors found a large sample of studies with Chinese participants. On the other hand, Mann [   94   ], in an exploratory study on cultural differences in decision- making in six cultures (USA, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Hong Kong, and Taiwan), found that Asian students scored higher in academic procrastination compared to Western students, which could justify the differential interest shown by Eastern researchers com-

Page 14:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   14 of 23  consequent emergence of greater procrastination. Therefore, longitudinal and long-term studies are necessary. This scoping review has inherent limitations associated with its scope and breadth, as it aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the literature rather than conduct a detailed assessment of individual study biases. Therefore, the assessment of individual study bias has not been conducted in this review. It is important to acknowledge these limitations when interpreting the findings and to consider them in future research.  5. Conclusions  In this study, we have found that there is a large proportion of publications reporting on the relationship between academic procrastination and personality, motivational, and self-regulation variables (both of learning and emotion) in childhood and adolescence. However, our analysis of the classification categories has allowed us to identify gaps in the literature, such as the need to define and operationalize the construct of procrastination in this age group and to develop appropriate assessment tools and techniques. Overall, it is not clear how prevalent the problem of academic procrastination is in this age group, while it is well-known to be a major problem in higher education, with broad consequences for psychological emotional and physical health, academic performance, and well-being. Based on the studies analyzed here, the authors argue for the need to clarify, through different methodological strategies, the role of promoting autonomy, developing self- regulation and self-control in childhood, and how they relate to parenting styles, educa- tional models, and teaching strategies. Emphasizing the possibility of early detection and intervention methods may pave the way for reducing the high prevalence of procrastination in university students. The main conclusions are as follows:  •   Addressing academic procrastination in children and adolescents should consider both individual and contextual factors, as well as appropriate interventions;  •   There is a need for the development of more appropriate assessment tools to mea- sure academic procrastination in children and adolescents, considering their specific developmental characteristics;  •   The prevalence of academic procrastination in this population is still understudied, highlighting a research gap that requires further attention;  •   In summary, further research and interventions are necessary to improve the under- standing and management of academic procrastination in children and adolescents. In order to enhance knowledge in this field, it is suggested to develop methodological improvements (such as the use of appropriate instruments, operationalization of the target behaviors under study, and high-quality research reporting) and promote the implemen- tation of policies that provide specific financial support to foster collaboration between institutions and different knowledge areas.  Author Contributions:   Conceptualization, M.P.G.-B., A.S.-E.P. and M. Á .L.-G.; methodology, M.P.G.- B. and M. Á .L.-G.; software, M. Á .L.-G.; formal analysis, M.P.G.-B. and M. Á .L.-G.; investigation, M.P.G.-B. and M. Á .L.-G.; resources, M.P.G.-B., A.S.-E.P. and M. Á .L.-G.; data curation, M.P.G.-B. and M. Á .L.-G.; writing—original draft preparation, M.P.G.-B. and M. Á .L.-G.; writing—review and editing, M.P.G.-B., A.S.-E.P. and M. Á .L.-G.; visualization, M.P.G.-B., A.S.-E.P. and M. Á .L.-G.; supervision, M.P.G.-B. and M. Á .L.-G. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.  Funding:   This research received no external funding.  Institutional Review Board Statement:   Not applicable.  Informed Consent Statement:   Not applicable.  Data Availability Statement:   Data can be accessed via contacting the authors upon approval.  Conflicts of Interest:   The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

Page 15:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   15 of 23  Appendix A  Table A1.   Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) Checklist [25].  Section   Item   PRISMA-ScR Checklist Item   Reported on Page # (Number)  Title Title   1   Identify the report as a scoping review.   1 Abstract Structured summary   2 Provide a structured summary including, as applicable: Background, objectives, eligibility criteria, sources of evidence, charting methods, results, and conclusions that relate to the review question(s) and objective(s). 1 Introduction Rationale   3 Describe the rationale for the review in the context of what is already known. Explain why the review question(s)/objective(s) lend themselves to a scoping review approach. 1–2 Objectives   4 Provide an explicit statement of the question(s) and objective(s) being addressed with reference to their key elements (e.g., population or participants, concepts, and context), or other relevant key elements used to conceptualize the review question(s) and/or objective(s)). 2 Methods Protocol, and registration   5 Indicate if a review protocol exists, if and where it can be accessed (e.g., web address), and, if available, provide registration information including registration number. 3 Eligibility criteria   6 Specify the characteristics of the sources of evidence (e.g., years considered, language, publication status) used as criteria for eligibility, and provide a rationale. 3, 6 Information sources   7 Describe all information sources (e.g., databases with dates of coverage, contact with authors to identify additional sources) in the search, as well as the date the most recent search was executed. 4 Search   8 Present the full electronic search strategy for at least one database, including any limits used, in order that it could be repeated. 4 Selection of sources of evidence   9   State the process for selecting sources of evidence (i.e., screening, eligibility) included.   5 Data charting process   10 Describe the methods of charting data from the included sources of evidence (e.g., piloted forms, forms that have been tested by the team before their use, whether data charting was carried out independently, in duplicate) and any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators. 5 Data items   11 List and define all variables for which data were sought and any assumptions and simplifications made. 5

Page 16:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   16 of 23  Table A1.   Cont.  Section   Item   PRISMA-ScR Checklist Item   Reported on Page # (Number)  Critical appraisal of individual sources of evidence 12 If performed, provide a rationale for conducting a critical appraisal of included sources of evidence, describe the methods used, and how this information was used in any data synthesis (if appropriate). N/A Summary measures   13   Not applicable for scoping reviews. Synthesis of results   14   Describe the methods of handling and summarizing the data that were charted.   5 Risk of bias across studies   15   Not applicable for scoping reviews. Additional analyses   16   Not applicable for scoping reviews. Results Selection of sources of evidence   17 Give numbers of sources of evidence screened, assessed for eligibility, and included in the review, with reasons for exclusions at each stage, ideally using a flow diagram. 6 Characteristics of sources of evidence   18   For each source of evidence, present characteristics for which data were charted and provide the citations.   6, 7, 8, 10 Critical appraisal within sources of evidence 19   If performed, present data on critical appraisal of included sources of evidence (see item 12). Results of individual sources of evidence   20 For each included source of evidence, present the relevant data that were charted that relate to the review question(s) and objective(s). Appendix B Synthesis of results   21   Summarize and/or present the charting results as they relate to the review question(s) and objective(s).   5, 6, 7, 8, 9 Risk of bias across studies   22   Not applicable for scoping reviews. Additional analyses   23   Not applicable for scoping reviews. Discussion Summary of evidence   24 Summarize the main results (including an overview of concepts, themes, and types of evidence available), explain how they relate to the review question(s) and objectives, and consider the relevance to key groups. 11–12 Limitations   25   Discuss the limitations of the scoping review process.   13 Conclusions   26 Provide a general interpretation of the results with respect to the review question(s) and objective(s), as well as potential implications and/or next steps. 13 Funding Funding   27 Describe sources of funding for the included sources of evidence, as well as sources of funding for the scoping review. Describe the role of the funders of the scoping review. 14

Page 23:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   23 of 23  128.   Rezaei, S.; Zebardast, A. The Mediating Role of Cognitive Emotion Regulation Strategies on Mindfulness, Anxiety, and Academic Procrastination in High Schoolers.   J. Pract. Clin. Psychol.   2021 ,   9 , 133–142. [CrossRef] 129.   Selçuk,  ̧ S.; Koçak, A.; Mouratidis, A.; Michou, A.; Sayıl, M. Procrastination, Perceived Maternal Psychological Control, and Structure in Math Class: The Intervening Role of Academic Self-concept.   Psychol. Sch.   2021 ,   58 , 1782–1798. [CrossRef] 130.   Wang, Y. Academic Procrastination and Test Anxiety: A Cross-Lagged Panel Analysis.   Aust. J. Guid. Couns.   2021 ,   31 , 122–129. [CrossRef] 131.   Yang, Z.Y. Does Procrastination Always Predict Lower Life Satisfaction? A Study on the Moderation Effect of Self-Regulation in China and the United Kingdom.   Front. Psychol.   2021 ,   12 , 690838. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 132.   Yu, Y.; Hua, L.; Feng, X.; Wang, Y.; Yu, Z.; Zi, T.; Zhao, Y.; Li, J. True Grit in Learning Math: The Math Anxiety-Achievement Link Is Mediated by Math-Specific Grit.   Front. Psychol.   2021 ,   12 , 645793. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 133.   Asmali, M.; Sayin, S.D. Academic Procrastination in Language Learning: Adolescent Learners’ Perspectives.   Acuity J. Engl. Lang. Pedagogy Lit. Cult.   2022 ,   7 , 220–235. 134.   Chaji, S.; Ebrahimpour, M.; Pakdaman, M.; Taheri, H. Study of Psychometric Properties of Problem-Solving Skills Questionnaire Heppner and Petersen in Primary School Students of Birjand.   J. Psychol.   2022 ,   21 , 1851–1866. [CrossRef] 135.   Galindo-Contreras, J.; Olivas-Ugarte, L.O. Tuckman Procrastination Scale (ATPS): Psychometric Evidence and Normative Data in Secondary School Students from Lima, Peru.   Propos. Represent.   2022 ,   10 , e1381. [CrossRef]  Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note:   The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Page 20:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   20 of 23  41.   Çakici, D.C. General and Academic in High School and University Students Examination of Procrastination Behavior. Unpub- lished. Master’s Thesis, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, 2003. 42.   Aitken, M.E.   A Personality Profile of the College Student Procrastinator ; University of Pittsburg: Pittsburg, PA, USA, 1982. 43.   Lay, C.H. At Last, My Research Article on Procrastination.   J. Res. Personal.   1986 ,   20 , 474–495. [CrossRef] 44.   Busko, B.; Deborah, A. Causes and Consequences of Perfectionism and Procrastination: A Structural Equation Model. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada, 1998. 45.   Huang, C.E. Self-Efficacy for Self-Regulation, Academic Anxiety, and Academic Procrastination of College Students: An Examination of Different Academic Situations and Procrastinators. Unpublished. Master’s Thesis, National Pingtung University, Pingtung, Taiwan, 2009. 46.   Dietz, F.; Hofer, M.; Fries, S. Individual Values, Learning Routines and Academic Procrastination.   Br. J. Educ. Psychol.   2007 ,  77 , 893–906. [CrossRef] 47.   McCloskey, J. Finally, My Thesis on Academic Procrastination. Master’s Thesis, University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA, 2012. 48.   Zuo, Y. An Exploratory Design of the Questionnaire of Middle School Students’ Academic Procrastination. Unpublished. Master’s Thesis, Southwest University, Chongqing, China, 2010. 49.   Ran, H. The Preliminary Compiling of the Academic Procrastination Questionnaire. Master’s Thesis, Southwest University, Chongqing, China, 2010. 50.   Lay, C.; Silverman, S. Trait Procrastination, Anxiety, and Dilatory Behavior.   Personal. Individ. Differ.   1996 ,   21 , 61–67. [CrossRef] 51.   Savari, K. Construction and Standarization of Academic Procrastination Test.   Educ. Measurement.   2011 , 1–15. 52.   Ros á rio, P.; Costa, M.; N ú ñez, J.C.; Gonz á lez-Pienda, J.; Solano, P.; Valle, A. Academic Procrastination: Associations with Personal, School, and Family Variables.   Span. J. Psychol.   2009 ,   12 , 118–127. [CrossRef] 53.   Steel, P. Arousal, Avoidant and Decisional Procrastinators: Do They Exist?   Personal. Individ. Differ.   2010 ,   48 , 926–934. [CrossRef] 54.   Mann, L.; Burnett, P.; Radford, M.; Ford, S. The Melbourne Decision Making Questionnaire: An Instrument for Measuring Patterns for Coping with Decisional Conflict.   J. Behav. Decis. Mak.   1997 ,   10 , 1–19. [CrossRef] 55.   Depreeuw, E.; Lens, W.   Vragenlijst Aangaande Studie-Organisatievaardigheden-VaSOV [Study Management Skills: A Questionnaire] ; Catholic University Leuven, Center for Research in Motivation and Time Perspective: Leuven, Belgium, 1998. 56.   Santyasa, I.W.; Rapi, N.K.; Sara, I.W.W. Project Based Learning and Academic Procrastination of Students in Learning Physics.   Int. J. Instr.   2020 ,   13 , 489–508. [CrossRef] 57.   Shih, S.S. An Examination of Factors Related to Taiwanese Adolescents Time Management and Academic Procrastination.   Int. J. Psychol.   2016 ,   51 , 513. 58.   Ocak, G.; Boyraz, S. Examination of the Relation between Academic Procrastination and Time Management Skills of Undergradu- ate Students in Terms of Some Variables.   J. Educ. Train. Stud.   2016 ,   4 , 76–84. [CrossRef] 59.   Günlü, A.; Ceyhan, A.A. Investigating Adolescents’ Behaviors on the Internet and Problematic Internet Usage.   Addicta Turk. J. Addict.   2017 ,   4 , 96–117. [CrossRef] 60.   Eisaa Saad, M.A. Self-Regulated Learning and Academic Procrastination as Predictors of Smartphone Addiction among Second Year-Middle School Learning Disabled Students.   Rev. Amazon. Investiga   2020 ,   9 , 236–243. [CrossRef] 61.   Quispe, G.C.; Carazas, S.M.C.; Marron, M.S.C.; Quintanilla, A.V. Academic procrastination: A descriptive study with high school students.   Apunt. Univ.   2021 ,   11 , 40–59. [CrossRef] 62.   Ziegler, N.; Opdenakker, M.-C. The Development of Academic Procrastination in First-Year Secondary Education Students: The Link with Metacognitive Self-Regulation, Self-Efficacy, and Effort Regulation.   Learn. Individ. Differ.   2018 ,   64 , 71–82. [CrossRef] 63.   Shih, S.-S. Factors Related to Taiwanese Adolescents’ Academic Procrastination, Time Management, and Perfectionism.   J. Educ. Res.   2017 ,   110 , 415–424. [CrossRef] 64.   Zhao, Y.; Elder, K.G. Evaluating Pharmacy Student Perceptions and Effectiveness of Procrastination Prevention Events.   Curr. Pharm. Teach. Learn.   2020 ,   12 , 570–576. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 65.   Zhen, R.; Li, L.; Ding, Y.; Hong, W.; Liu, R.-D. How Does Mobile Phone Dependency Impair Academic Engagement among Chinese Left-behind Children?   Child. Youth Serv. Rev.   2020 ,   116 , 105169. [CrossRef] 66.   Xue, X.; Wang, Y.; Li, H.; Gao, J.; Si, J. The Association between Mathematical Attitudes, Academic Procrastination and Mathematical Achievement among Primary School Students: The Moderating Effect of Mathematical Metacognition.   Curr. Psychol.   2021 ,   42 , 7953–7964. [CrossRef] 67.   Owens, A.M.; Newbegin, I. Procrastination in High School Achievement: A Causal Structural Model.   J. Soc. Behav. Personal.   1997 ,  12 , 869–887. 68.   Bong, M.; Hwang, A.; Noh, A.; Kim, S. Perfectionism and Motivation of Adolescents in Academic Contexts.   J. Educ. Psychol.   2014 ,  106 , 711–729. [CrossRef] 69.   Jiang, Y.; Rosenzweig, E.Q.; Gaspard, H. An Expectancy-Value-Cost Approach in Predicting Adolescent Students’ Academic Motivation and Achievement.   Contemp. Educ. Psychol.   2018 ,   54 , 139–152. [CrossRef] 70.   Kalafat, T.; Ka  ̆ gan, M.; Boysan, M.; Güngör,  ̇ I. Associations between Academic Competence and Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms among Adolescents.   Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci.   2010 ,   5 , 309–313. [CrossRef] 71.   Katz, I.; Eilot, K.; Nevo, N. “I’ll Do It Later”: Type of Motivation, Self-Efficacy and Homework Procrastination.   Motiv. Emot.   2014 ,  38 , 111–119. [CrossRef]

Page 19:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   19 of 23  12.   Schubert Walker, L.J.; Stewart, D.W. Overcoming the Powerlessness of Procrastination.   Guid. Couns.   2000 ,   16 , 39. 13.   Ferrari, J.R.; Johnson, J.L.; McCown, W.G.   Procrastination and Task Avoidance: Theory, Research, and Treatment ; Springer Science & Business Media: New York, NY, USA, 1995; ISBN 978-0-306-44842-3. 14.   Salluca, M.Y.; Valeriano, D.Y.A.; Gutierrez, R.A.; Casa-Coila, M.D. Social network addiction and academic procrastination in Peruvian adolescents in times of coronavirus COVID-19.   Rev. Electron. Interuniv. Form. Profr.   2022 ,   25 , 129–143. [CrossRef] 15.   Muarifah, A.; Rofiah, N.H.; Mujidin, M.; Mohamad, Z.S.; Oktaviani, F. Students’ Academic Procrastination during the COVID-19 Pandemic: How Does Adversity Quotient Mediate Parental Social Support?   Front. Educ.   2022 ,   7 , 516. [CrossRef] 16.   Üztemur, S.; Dinç, E. Academic Procrastination Using Social Media: A Cross-sectional Study with Middle School Students on the Buffering and Moderator Roles of Self-control and Gender.   Psychol. Sch.   2022 ,   60 , 1060–1082. [CrossRef] 17.   Kim, K.R.; Seo, E.H. The Relationship between Procrastination and Academic Performance: A Meta-Analysis.   Personal. Individ. Differ.   2015 ,   82 , 26–33. [CrossRef] 18.   Huntley, C.D.; Young, B.; Temple, J.; Longworth, M.; Smith, C.T.; Jha, V.; Fisher, P.L. The Efficacy of Interventions for Test-Anxious University Students: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.   J. Anxiety Disord.   2019 ,   63 , 36–50. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 19.   Amani, H.; Habibi-Kaleybar, R.; Farid, A.; Sheykhalizadeh, S. Meta-Analysis of the Effectiveness of Interventions on test anxiety reduction.   Psychol. Res.   2021 ,   45 , 56. 20.   Sirois, F.M. Procrastination and Stress: Exploring the Role of Self-Compassion.   Self Identity   2013 ,   13 , 128–145. [CrossRef] 21.   Sirois, F.M. Procrastination and Stress: A Conceptual Review of Why Context Matters.   Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health   2023 ,  20 , 5031. [CrossRef] 22.   Sirois, F.M.; Pychyl, T.A.   Procrastination, Health, and Well-Being ; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2016. 23.   L ó pez-Gonz á lez, M.A.; De-Mar í a, B.; Rubio-Garay, F.; Rodr í guez-Cifuentes, F.; Fern á ndez-Salinero San Mart í n, S.; Latorre, F.; Topa, G. Recuperaci ó n laboral en empleados fuera del trabajo: Una revisi ó n paraguas de revisiones sistem á ticas y meta-an á lisis [Recovery from Work: An Umbrella Review of Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis].   Accion Psicol.   2022 ,   19 , 1–20. [CrossRef] 24.   L ó pez-Gonz á lez, M.A.; Morales-Landaz á bal, P.; Topa, G. Psychodrama Group Therapy for Social Issues: A Systematic Review of Controlled Clinical Trials.   Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health   2021 ,   18 , 4442. [CrossRef] 25.   Tricco, A.C.; Lillie, E.; Zarin, W.; O’Brien, K.K.; Colquhoun, H.; Levac, D.; Moher, D.; Peters, M.D.J.; Horsley, T.; Weeks, L.; et al. PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and Explanation.   Ann. Intern. Med.   2018 ,   169 , 467–473. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 26.   Aromataris, E.; Munn, Z.   JBI Manual for Evidence Synthesis ; JBI: Adelaide, Australia, 2020. 27.   Munn, Z.; Stern, C.; Aromataris, E.; Lockwood, C.; Jordan, Z. What Kind of Systematic Review Should I Conduct? A Proposed Typology and Guidance for Systematic Reviewers in the Medical and Health Sciences.   BMC Med. Res. Methodol.   2018 ,   18 , 5. [CrossRef] 28.   Hidalgo-Fuentes, S.; Martinez-Alvarez, I.; Sospedra-Baeza, M.J. Self-esteem and procrastination in the academic field: A meta- analysis.   Rev. Fuentes   2022 ,   24 , 77–89. [CrossRef] 29.   Lu, D.; He, Y.; Tan, Y. Gender, Socioeconomic Status, Cultural Differences, Education, Family Size and Procrastination: A Sociodemographic Meta-Analysis.   Front. Psychol.   2022 ,   12 , 719425. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 30.   Pereira, L.D.C.; Ramos, F.P. Academic Procrastination in University Students. A Systematic Review of the Literature.   Psicol. Esc. E Educ.   2021 ,   25 . [CrossRef] 31.   Zacks, S.; Hen, M. Academic Interventions for Academic Procrastination: A Review of the Literature.   J. Prev. Interv. Community  2018 ,   46 , 117–130. [CrossRef] 32.   Milgram, N.; Toubiana, Y. Academic Anxiety, Academic Procrastination, and Parental Involvement in Students and Their Parents.  Br. J. Educ. Psychol.   1999 ,   69 , 345–361. [CrossRef] 33.   Owens, A.M.; Newbegin, I. Academic Procrastination of Adolescents in English, and Mathematics: Gender and Personality Variations.   J. Soc. Behav. Personal.   2000 ,   15 , 111–124. 34.   Klassen, R.M.; Kuzucu, E. Academic Procrastination and Motivation of Adolescents in Turkey.   Educ. Psychol.   2009 ,   29 , 69–81. [CrossRef] 35.   Dong, Y.; Izadpanah, S. The Effect of Corrective Feedback from Female Teachers on Formative Assessments: Educational Resilience, Educational Belongingness, and Academic Procrastination in an English Language Course.   Curr. Psychol. J. Divers. Perspect. Divers. Psychol. Issues   2022 . [CrossRef] 36.   Kheirkhah, A. Investigating the Effect of Self-Efficacy Training and Learning Strategies on Academic Procrastination of Female Students.   Int. J. Pharm. Res.   2021 ,   13 , 6267–6276. [CrossRef] 37.   Lubis, N.Y.; Djuwita, E. Penerapan Group Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT) Untuk Meurunkan Prokrastinasi Akademik Pada Siswi Smp Yang Menjalani Pendidikan Jarak Jauh (PJJ).   J. Syntax Lit.   2022 ,   7 , 1446–1460. 38.   Mostafa, A.A. Academic Procrastination, Self-Efficacy Beliefs, and Academic Achievement among Middle School First Year Students with Learning Disabilities.   Int. J. Psycho Educ. Sci.   2018 ,   7 , 87–93. 39.   Zohreyi, T.; Erfani, N.; Jadidiyan, A.A. Predicting Academic Stress Base on Academic Procrastination among Female Students.  Acta Med. Mediterr.   2016 ,   32 , 1257–1264. 40.   Tuckman, B.W. The Development and Concurrent Validity of the Procrastination Scale.   Educ. Psychol. Meas.   1991 ,   51 , 473–480. [CrossRef]

Page 21:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   21 of 23  72.   Tang, K.; Deng, X.; Fan, F.; Long, K.; Wang, H.; Zhang, Y. Mediating Effect of Academic Self-Efficacy between Parenting Style and Academic Procrastination.   Chin. J. Clin. Psychol.   2014 ,   22 , 889–892. 73.   Çam, Z.; Ögülmüs, S. Testing of a Model on the School Burnout among High School Students and Exploring the Model’s Prediction Level of Grade Retention.   Int. J. Curric. Instr.   2021 ,   13 , 950–985. 74.   Davis, J.K.   The Effects of Culture on High School Academic Procrastination ; ProQuest Information & Learning: Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2001; Volume 61. 75.   Ros á rio, P.; N ú ñez, J.C.; Salgado, A.; Gonz á lez-Pienda, J.A.; Valle, A.; Joly, C.; Bernardo, A. Test Anxiety: Associations with Personal and Family Variables.   Psicothema   2008 ,   20 , 563–570. [PubMed] 76.   Borekci, C.; Uyangor, N. Family Attitude, Academic Procrastination and Test Anxiety as Predictors of Academic Achievement.  Int. J. Educ. Methodol.   2018 ,   4 , 219–226. [CrossRef] 77.   Mih, V. Role of Parental Support for Learning, Autonomous/Control Motivation, and Forms of Self-Regulation on Academic Attainment in High School Students: A Path Analysis.   Cogn. Brain Behav.   2013 ,   17 , 35–59. 78.   Hong, J.C.; Hwang, M.Y.; Kuo, Y.C.; Hsu, W.Y. Parental Monitoring and Helicopter Parenting Relevant to Vocational Student’s Procrastination and Self-Regulated Learning.   Learn. Individ. Differ.   2015 ,   42 , 139–146. [CrossRef] 79.   Zhao, W.; Wang, X.; Li, J.; Li, Q.; Chen, C. “Time Is My Own Treasure”: Parental Autonomy Support and Academic Procrastination among Chinese Adolescents.   Psychol. Res. Behav. Manag.   2022 ,   15 , 2773–2782. [CrossRef] 80.   Yıldız Durak, H. Modeling of Variables Related to Problematic Internet Usage and Problematic Social Media Usage in Adolescents.  Curr. Psychol.   2020 ,   39 , 1375–1387. [CrossRef] 81.   Hong, W.; Liu, R.-D.; Ding, Y.; Jiang, S.; Yang, X.; Sheng, X. Academic Procrastination Precedes Problematic Mobile Phone Use in Chinese Adolescents: A Longitudinal Mediation Model of Distraction Cognitions.   Addict. Behav.   2021 ,   121 , 106993. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 82.   Tras, Z.; Gökçen, G. Academic Procrastination and Social Anxiety as Predictive Variables Internet Addiction of Adolescents.   Int. Educ. Stud.   2020 ,   13 , 23–35. [CrossRef] 83.   Khalifa, A.G. Social Networking Addiction and Quality of Academic Life among First-Year High School Students in Saudi Arabia: The Mediating Role of Academic Procrastination.   J. Intellect. Disabil. Diagn. Treat.   2021 ,   9 , 374–380. [CrossRef] 84.   Gezgin, D.M. Gender, Self-Regulation, Academic Procrastination, and Smartphone Checking Frequency During Study Hours in Predicting Turkish Adolescents’ Smartphone Addiction.   Addicta Turk. J. Addict.   2022 ,   9 , 38–47. [CrossRef] 85.   Kocoglu, D.; Emiroglu, O.N. The Impact of Comprehensive School Nursing Services on Students’ Academic Performance.   J. Caring Sci.   2017 ,   6 , 5–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 86.   Ghadampour, E.; Beiranvand, K. Effect of Cognitive and Metacognitive Learning Strategies Training on Academic Procrastination and Self Efficacy in Students.   Adv. Cogn. Sci.   2019 ,   21 , 31–41. [CrossRef] 87.   Motie, H.; Heidari, M.; Sadeghi, M.A. Development of A Self -Regulation Package for Academic Procrastination and Evaluation of Its Effectiveness.   Eur. J. Soc. Behav. Sci.   2013 ,   4 , 889–896. 88.   Jaradat, A.K.M. Test Anxiety in Jordanian Students: Measurement, Correlates and Treatment. 2004. Available online: https: //archiv.ub.uni-marburg.de/diss/z2004/0124/pdf/dakmj.pdf (accessed on 22 November 2022). 89.   Yildiz, B.; Iskender, M. The Secure Attachment Style Oriented Psycho-Educational Program for Reducing Intolerance of Un- certainty and Academic Procrastination: Yıldız & Iskender: Secure Attachment, Academic Procrastination & Intolerance of Uncertainty.   Curr. Psychol.   2021 ,   40 , 1850–1863. [CrossRef] 90.   Van Eerde, W. Procrastination in Academic Settings and the Big Five Model of Personality: A Meta-Analysis. In   Counseling the Procrastinator in Academic Settings ; Schouwenburg, H.C., Lay, C.H., Pychyl, T.A., Ferrari, J.R., Eds.; American Psychological Association: Washington, DC, USA, 2004; pp. 29–40. ISBN 1-59147-107-9. 91.   Van Eerde, W. A Meta-Analytically Derived Nomological Network of Procrastination.   Personal. Individ. Differ.   2003 ,   35 , 1401–1418. [CrossRef] 92.   Van Eerde, W.; Klingsieck, K.B. Overcoming Procrastination? A Meta-Analysis of Intervention Studies.   Educ. Res. Rev.   2018 ,   25 , 73–85. [CrossRef] 93.   Sharin, A.N. E-Learning During COVID-19: A Review of Literature.   J. Pengaj. Media Malays.   2021 ,   23 , 15–28. [CrossRef] 94.   Mann, L. Cross-Cultural Differences in Self-Reported Decision-Making Style and Confidence.   Int. J. Psychol.   1998 ,   33 , 325–335. [CrossRef] 95.   Zimmerman, B.J. From Cognitive Modeling to Self-Regulation: A Social Cognitive Career Path.   Educ. Psychol.   2013 ,   48 , 135–147. [CrossRef] 96.   Zimmerman, B.J.; Schunk, D.H. Self-Regulated Learning and Performance: An Introduction and an Overview. In   Handbook of Self-Regulation of Learning and Performance ; Zimmerman, B.J., Schunk, D.H., Eds.; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2011; pp. 1–12. ISBN 978-0-203-83901-0. 97.   Malkoç, A.; Mutlu, A.K. Academic Self-Efficacy and Academic Procrastination: Exploring the Mediating Role of Academic Motivation in Turkish University Students.   Univers. J. Educ. Res.   2018 ,   6 , 2087–2093. 98.   Tice, D.M.; Bratslavsky, E.; Baumeister, R.F. Emotional Distress Regulation Takes Precedence over Impulse Control: If You Feel Bad, Do It!   J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.   2001 ,   80 , 53–67. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 99.   Quirin, M.; Kuhl, J. Positive Affect, Self-Access, and Health: Research Based on PSI Theory.   Z. Gesundh.   2008 ,   16 , 139–142. [CrossRef]

Page 22:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   22 of 23  100.   Gonz á lez-Brignardello, M.P.; S á nchez-Elvira-Paniagua,   Á . Can engagement buffer the harmful effects of academic procrastination?  Acci ó n Psicol.   2013 ,   10 , 117–134. [CrossRef] 101.   Cazan, A.-M. Learning Motivation, Engagement and Burnout among University Students.   Procedia Soc.   Behav.   Sci.   2015 ,  187 , 413–417. [CrossRef] 102.   Milgram, N.; Marshevsky, S.; Sadeh, C. Correlates of Academic Procrastination: Discomfort, Task Aversiveness, and Task Capability.   J. Psychol. Interdiscip. Appl.   1995 ,   129 , 145–155. [CrossRef] 103.   Nadeau, M.F.; Senecal, C.; Guay, F. Determinants of academic procrastination: A mediation model of family context and self-system processes.   Can. J. Behav. Sci.-Rev. Can. Sci. Comport.   2003 ,   35 , 97–110. [CrossRef] 104.   Klassen, R.M.; Ang, R.P.; Chong, W.H.; Krawchuk, L.L.; Huan, V.S.; Wong, I.Y.F.; Yeo, L.S. A Cross-Cultural Study of Adolescent Procrastination.   J. Res. Adolesc.   2009 ,   19 , 799–811. [CrossRef] 105.   Uzun Özer, B. Academic Procrastination in Group of High School Students: Frequency, Possible Reasons and Role of Hope. Turk.  Psychol. Couns. Guid. J.   2009 ,   4 , 18–19. 106.   Al-Attiyah, A. Academic Procrastination and Its Relation to Motivation and Self-Efficacy: The Case of Qatari Primary School Students.   Int. J. Learn.   2010 ,   17 , 173–186. [CrossRef] 107.   Kuhnle, C.; Hofer, M.; Kilian, B. The Relationship of Self-Control, Procrastination, Motivational Interference and Regret with School Grades and Life Balance.   Diskurs Kindh. Jugendforsch./Discourse J. Child. Adolesc. Res.   2011 ,   6 , 31–44. 108.   Uzun Özer, B.; Ferrari, J.R. Gender Orientation and Academic Procrastination: Exploring Turkish High School Students.   Individ. Differ. Res.   2011 ,   9 , 33–40. 109.   Liu, M.-Z.; Lu, G.-Z. Reliability and Validity of Aitken Procrastination Inventory in Middle School Students.   Chin. Ment. Health J.  2011 ,   25 , 380–384. 110.   Hofer, M.; Kuhnle, C.; Kilian, B.; Fries, S. Cognitive Ability and Personality Variables as Predictors of School Grades and Test Scores in Adolescents.   Learn. Instr.   2012 ,   22 , 368–375. [CrossRef] 111.   Motie, H.; Heidari, M.; Sadeghi, M.A. Predicting Academic Procrastination during Self-Regulated Learning in Iranian First Grade High School Students.   Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci.   2012 ,   69 , 2299–2308. [CrossRef] 112.   Jahromi, R.G.; Hejazi, E.; Ejei, J.; Fard, M.K. Investigating the Mediating Role of Achievement Goals in the Relationship between Need for Cognition and Cognitive Engagement: The Effect of Procrastination Context.   J. Psychol.   2015 ,   19 , 3–21. 113.   Gazidari, E.; Lavasani, M.G.; Ejei, J. The Relationship between Academic Identity and Self-Regulation Learning Strategies with Academic Procrastinate Students.   J. Psychol.   2016 ,   19 , 346–362. 114.   Ng, B. Towards Lifelong Learning: Identifying Learner Profiles on Procrastination and Self-Regulation.   New Waves-Educ. Res. Dev. J.   2016 ,   19 , 41–54. 115.   Chen, B.-B.; Han, W. Ecological Assets and Academic Procrastination among Adolescents: The Mediating Role of Commitment to Learning.   Front. Psychol.   2017 ,   8 , 1971. [CrossRef] 116.   Yang, Q.; Shi, M.; Shu, S. Academic Procrastination to Parenting Style and Achievements Motivation in Middle School Students. Chin.   J. Clin. Psychol.   2017 ,   25 , 558–560. 117.   Korkmaz, O.; Ilhan, T.; Bardakci, S. An Investigation of Self-Efficacy, Locus of Control, and Academic Procrastination as Predictors of Academic Achievement in Students Diagnosed as Gifted and Non-Gifted.   Online Submiss.   2018 ,   4 , 173–192. 118.   Macias, A.B.; Nevarez, S.B. Procrastination, and stress. Analysis of its relationship in high school students. CPU-E Rev.   Investig. Educ.   2019 ,   28 , 132–151. [CrossRef] 119.   Ahmadi, S.; Toulabi, S.; Ilanloo, H. The Relationship Between Tendency to Substance Abuse and Resilience and Academic Procrastination in Secondary School Students.   J. Arak Univ. Med. Sci.   2020 ,   23 , 108–117. [CrossRef] 120.   Sula Atas, N.; Kumcagiz, H. Academic Procrastination Attitudes of Adolescents, Academic Self-Efficacy Beliefs and Perfectionism Levels. Hacet. Univ. EGITIM Fak. Derg.-Hacet.   Univ. J. Educ.   2020 ,   35 , 375–386. [CrossRef] 121.   Eissa Saad, M.A.; Khalifa, A.G. Modeling Self-Regulated Learning: The Mediating Role in the Relationship between Academic Procrastination and Problematic Smartphone Use among Third Year-Middle School Learning Disabled Students.   Electron. J. Res. Educ. Psychol.   2020 ,   18 , 507–522. [CrossRef] 122.   Gündüz, G.F. The Relationship between Academic Procrastination Behaviors of Secondary School Students, Learning Styles and Parenting Behaviors.   Int. J. Contemp. Educ. Res.   2020 ,   7 , 253–266. [CrossRef] 123.   Lenggono, B.; Tentama, F. Construct Measurement of Academic Procrastination of Eleventh Grade High School Students in Sukoharjo.   Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res.   2020 ,   9 , 454–459. 124.   Trujillo-Chum á n, K.; No é -Grijalva, M. La Escala de Procrastinaci ó n Acad é mica (EPA): Validez y Confiabilidad en una Muestra de Estudiantes Peruanos [The Academic Procrastination Scale: Validity and Reliability in a Sample of Peruvian Students].   Rev. Psicol. Educ.   2020 ,   15 , 98–107. 125.   Fulano, C.; Magalh ã es, P.; N ú ñez, J.C.; Marcuzzo, S.; Ros á rio, P. As the Twig Is Bent, so Is the Tree Inclined: Lack of Prior Knowledge as a Driver of Academic Procrastination.   Int. J. Sch. Educ. Psychol.   2021 ,   9 , S21–S33. [CrossRef] 126.   Niu, Y.; Jiang, N.; Jiang, X. Factors Related to the Resilience of Tibetan Adolescent Survivors Ten Years after the Yushu Earthquake.  Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct.   2021 ,   65 , 102554. [CrossRef] 127.   Opdenakker, M.C. Need-Supportive and Need-Thwarting Teacher Behavior: Their Importance to Boys’ and Girls’ Academic Engagement and Procrastination Behavior.   Front. Psychol.   2021 ,   12 , 628064. [CrossRef]

Page 18:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   18 of 23  Table A2.   Cont.  Bibliometric Information   Sample   Design Author   Year   Doc. Type   Edu Level   N   Country  Zhen et al. [65]   2020   Article   SS   1505   CHN   EPF Çam and Ögülmüs [73]   2021   Article   SS   1068   TUR   EPF Fulano et al. [125]   2021   Article   SS   1000   MOZ   EPF Hong et al. [81]   2021   Article   SS   633   CHN   EPF Khalifa [83]   2021   Article   SS   250   SAU   EPF Kheirkhah [36]   2021   Article   SS   559   IRN   RCT Niu et al. [126]   2021   Article   SS   623   CHN   EPF Opdenakker [127]   2021   Article   SS   687   NLD   EPF Quispe et al. [61]   2021   Article   SS   36   PER   EPF Rezaei and Zebardast [128]   2021   Article   SS   350   IRN   EPF Selçuk et al. [129]   2021   Article   SS   1000   TUR   EPF Wang [130]   2021   Article   SS   566   CHN   EPF Xue et al. [66]   2021   Article   PS   338   CHN   EPF Yang et al. [131]   2021   Article   SS   353   CHN   EPF Yildiz and Iskender [89]   2021   Article   SS   1068   TUR   RCT Yu et al. [132]   2021   Article   SS   24   CHN   EPF Asmali and Sayin [133]   2022   Article   PS   245   TUR   EPF Chaji and Ebrahimpour [134]   2022   Article   PS   662   CHN   EPF Dong and Izadpanah [35]   2022   Article   SS   5   IRN   RCT Galindo-Contreras and Olivas-Ugarte [135]   2022   Article   SS   256   PER   EPF Gezgin [84]   2022   Article   SS   300   TUR   EPF Lubis and Djuwita [37]   2022   Article   SS   1255   IDN   PE Muarifah et al. [15]   2022   Article   SS   429   IDN   EPF Salluca et al. [14]   2022   Article   SS   370   PER   EPF Üztemur and Dinç [16]   2022   Article   SS   136   TUR   EPF Zhao et al. [79]   2022   Article   SS   514   CHN   EPF  Note: Edu Level (Educational Level): PS (Primary School) and SS (Secondary School). Country: AUS (Australia), CAN (Canada), CHN (China), DEU (Germany), EGY (Egypt), IDN (Indonesia), IRN (Iran), ISR (Israel), JOR (Jordan), KOR (South Korea), MEX (Mexico), MOZ (Mozambique), NLD (Netherlands), PER (Peru), PRT (Portugal), QAT (Qatar), ROU (Romania), SAU (Saudi Arabia), SGP (Singapore), TUR (Turkey), TWN (Taiwan), and USA (United States). Design: EPF (Ex Post Facto), PE (Pre-Experimental study), RCT (Randomized Controlled Trial), and RNCT (Randomized non-Controlled Trial).  References  1.   Rothblum, E.D.; Solomon, L.J.; Murakami, J. Affective, Cognitive, and Behavioral Differences between High and Low Procrastina- tors.   J. Couns. Psychol.   1986 ,   33 , 387–394. [CrossRef] 2.   Senecal, C.; Koestner, R.; Vallerand, R.J. Self-Regulation and Academic Procrastination.   J. Soc. Psychol.   1995 ,   135 , 607–619. [CrossRef] 3.   Counseling the Procrastinator in Academic Settings ; Schouwenburg, H.C.; Lay, C.H.; Pychyl, T.A.; Ferrari, J.R. (Eds.) American Psychological Association: Washington, DC, USA, 2004. 4.   Steel, P. The Nature of Procrastination: A Meta-Analytic and Theoretical Review of Quintessential Self-Regulatory Failure.   Psychol. Bull.   2007 ,   133 , 65–94. [CrossRef] 5.   Burka, J.B.; Yuen, L.M.   Procrastination: Why You Do It, What to Do about It ; Addison-Wesley: Boston, MA, USA, 1983. 6.   D í az-Morales, J. Procrastination: A Review of Scales and Correlates.   Rev. Iberoam. Diagn. Eval. Aval. Psicol.   2019 ,   51 , 43–60. [CrossRef] 7.   Blunt, A.K.; Pychyl, T.A. Task Aversiveness and Procrastination: A Multi-Dimensional Approach to Task Aversiveness across Stages of Personal Projects.   Personal. Individ. Differ.   2000 ,   28 , 153–167. [CrossRef] 8.   Schouwenburg, H.C. Procrastinators and Fear of Failure: An Exploration of Reasons for Procrastination.   Eur. J. Personal.   1992 ,  6 , 225–236. [CrossRef] 9.   Sirois, F.M.; Giguere, B. Giving in When Feeling Less Good: Procrastination, Action Control, and Social Temptations.   Br. J. Soc. Psychol.   2018 ,   57 , 404–427. [CrossRef] 10.   Klassen, R.M.; Krawchuk, L.L.; Rajani, S. Academic Procrastination of Undergraduates: Low Self-Efficacy to Self-Regulate Predicts Higher Levels of Procrastination.   Contemp. Educ. Psychol.   2008 ,   33 , 915–931. [CrossRef] 11.   Steel, P.; Ferrari, J.R. Sex, Education and Procrastination: An Epidemiological Study of Procrastinators’ Characteristics from a Global Sample: Sex, Education and Procrastination.   Eur. J. Personal.   2013 ,   27 , 51–58. [CrossRef]

Page 17:
Children   2023 ,   10 , 1016   17 of 23  Appendix B  Table A2.   Summary of Scoping Review.  Bibliometric Information   Sample   Design Author   Year   Doc. Type   Edu Level   N   Country  Milgram et al. [102]   1995   Article   SS   195   ISR   EPF Owens and Newbegin [67]   1997   Article   PS   418   AUS   EPF Milgram and Toubiana [32]   1999   Article   SS   245   ISR   EPF Owens and Newbegin [33]   2000   Article   SS   380   AUS   EPF Davis [74]   2001   Thesis   SS   284   USA   EPF Nadeau et al. [103]   2003   Article   SS   100   CAN   EPF Jaradat [88]   2004   Thesis   SS   729   JOR   RCT Dietz and et al. [46]   2007   Article   SS   704   DEU   EPF Ros á rio et al. [75]   2008   Article   SS   533/796   PRT   EPF Klassen and Kuzucu [34]   2009   Article   SS   508   TUR   EPF Klassen et al. [104]   2009   Article   SS   612   CAN, SGP   EPF Uzun Özer [105]   2009   Article   SS   223   TUR   EPF Ros á rio et al. [75]   2009   Article   SS   580/809   PRT   EPF Al-Attiyah [106]   2010   Article   PS   538   QAT   EPF Kalafat et al. [70]   2010   Article   SS   285   TUR   EPF Kuhnle et al. [107]   2011   Article   SS   348   DEU   EPF Uzun Özer and Ferrari [108]   2011   Article   SS   214   TUR   EPF Liu and Lu [109]   2011   Article   SS   712   CHN   EPF Hofer et al. [110]   2012   Article   SS   697   DEU   EPF Motie et al. [111]   2012   Article   SS   250   IRN   EPF Mih [77]   2013   Article   SS   189   ROU   EPF Motie et al. [87]   2013   Article   SS   66   IRN   RCT Bong et al. [68]   2014   Article   SS   306   KOR   EPF Katz et al. [71]   2014   Article   PS   171   ISR   EPF Tang et al. [72]   2014   Article   SS   460   CHN   EPF Hong et al. [78]   2015   Article   SS   597   TWN   EPF Jahromi et al. [112]   2015   Article   SS   268   IRN   EPF Gazidari et al. [113]   2016   Article   SS   311   IRN   EPF Ng [114]   2016   Article   SS   442   SGP   EPF Shih [57]   2016   Article   SS   405   TWN   EPF Zohreyi et al. [39]   2016   Article   SS   210   IRN   EPF Chen and Han [115]   2017   Article   SS   577   CHN   EPF Günlü and Ceyhan [59]   2017   Article   SS   1088   TUR   EPF Kocoglu and Emiroglu [85]   2017   Article   PS   31   TUR   RNCT Shih [63]   2017   Article   SS   405   TWN   EPF Yang et al. [116]   2017   Article   SS   360   CHN   EPF Borekci and Uyangor [76]   2018   Article   SS   496   TUR   EPF Jiang et al. [69]   2018   Article   SS   848   KOR   EPF Korkmaz et al. [117]   2018   Article   SS   167   TUR   EPF Mostafa [38]   2018   Article   SS   100   EGY   EPF Ziegler and Opdenakker [62]   2018   Article   SS   566   NLD   EPF Ghadampour and Beiranvand [ 86 ]   2019   Article   SS   30   IRN   RCT Macias and Nevarez [118]   2019   Article   SS   300   MEX   EPF Ahmadi et al. [119]   2020   Article   SS   149   IRN   EPF Sula Atas and Kumcagiz [120]   2020   Article   SS   602   TUR   EPF Durak [80]   2020   Article   SS   451   TUR   EPF Eissa and Khalifa [121]   2020   Article   SS   228   EGY   EPF Gündüz [122]   2020   Article   SS   358   TUR   EPF Lenggono and Tentama [123]   2020   Article   SS   60   IDN   EPF Saad [60]   2020   Article   SS   68   EGY   EPF Santyasa et al. [56]   2020   Article   SS   124   IDN   RNCT Tras and Gökçen [1]   2020   Article   SS   599   TUR   EPF Trujillo-Chum á n and No é -Grijalva [124]   2020   Article   SS   366   PER   EPF

