Page 17:
Appendix C.   Descriptive statistics for sociodemographic and   – economic variables of students with a valid admission to psychology, who enrolled in a different program  Variable   Frequencies  n   277  Cohort   13 W: 38 (14 %) 14 W: 37 (13 %) 15 W: 37 (13 %) 16 W: 33 (12 %) 17 W: 24 (9 %) 18 W: 30 (11 %) 19 W: 28 (10 %) 20 W: 14 (5 %) 21 W: 11 (4 %) 22 W: 16 (6 %) 23 W: 9 (3 %)  Outcome status   Graduation: 35 (13 %) Dropout: 242 (87 %)  Mobility   Outgoing: 14 (5 %) No mobility: 263 (95 %)  Gender   Women: 202 (73 %) Men: 75 (27 %)  School type   Academic high-school: 76 (27 %) Scientific high-school: 81 (29 %) Commercial high-school: 17 (6 %) Technical high-school: 31 (11 %) Economic high-school: 21 (8 %) Schools from foreign countries: 22 (8 %) Other school types: 25 (9 %) Missing (removed): 0 (0 %)  University degree of parents   No degree: 124 (45 %) One parent: 31 (11 %) Both parents: 34 (12 %) Missing: 88 (32 %)  Migration status   No migration: 162 (59 %) First generation migration: 20 (7 %) Second generation migration (one parent): 11 (4 %) Second generation migration (both parents): 4 (1 %) Missing: 80 (29 %)  Nationality   Austria: 247 (89 %) EU: 26 (9 %) non-EU countries: 4 (1 %)  Appendix D.   Scatterplots and correlation diagrams for graduates and dropouts of students, who enrolled elsewhere  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  17

Page 18:
Fig. A1.   Scatterplots and correlation diagrams for graduates among students with a valid admission to psychology, who enrolled in a different program, including a linear regression line with 95 % CI; * marks significant effects of p   <   .05.  Fig. A2.   Scatterplots and correlation diagrams for dropouts among students with a valid admission to psychology, who enrolled in a different program, including a linear regression line with 95 % CI; * marks significant effects of p   <   .05.  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  18

Page 21:
Westrick, P. A., Le, H., Robbins, S. B., Radunzel, J. M., & Schmidt, F. L. (2015). College performance and retention: A meta-analysis of the predictive validities of ACT ®  scores, high school grades, and SES.   Educational Assessment, 20 , 23 – 45 .  Wickham, H., Chang, W., Henry, L., Pedersen, T. L., Takahashi, K., Wilke, C., & Dunnington, D. (2023). ggplot2.   Create Elegant Data Visualisations Using the Grammar of Graphics, package version, 3 (4), 4 .  Zyl-Schalekamp, C. V., & Mthombeni, P. (2015). Social-background factors affecting the academic success of first year sociology students at the University of Johannesburg, South Africa.   Journal of Sociology and Social Anthropology, 6 (1), 31 – 44 .  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  21

Page 4:
variables was not mandatory several years ago. In the variable school type, 22 entries were removed during the data curation process, as they were specified as   “ previous university degree ” . This was not considered relevant information on previous schools and the number was also too small for robust data analysis.  2.1.4.   Students with admission to psychology and other enrollments  Of the 674 students with a valid admission to the bachelor's program psychology that could not be matched, 277 (41 %) had an enrollment in at least one other program at the University of Graz in the same semester as the admission exam. The other 397 (59 %) students could not be matched in the same semester, but among those, 374 enrolled in at least one additional program after their initial admission semester up until the academic year 2023/24. The remaining 23 (3 %) students either never enrolled at the University of Graz or could not be matched due to writing errors. Descriptive statistics for the group of students that enrolled in their original admission semester ( n   =   277) can be found in  Appendix C . Students with later enrollments were excluded, as they cannot be compared with the cohorts of psychology students. Compared to psychology students (25 %), the proportion of dropouts (87 %) was higher. In the sample of psychology students, the relative number of people from schools of foreign countries (33 %) was higher compared to those not enrolling in psychology (8 %), which is reflected in the migration status and the nationality. The proportion of the other vari -  ables are similar to each other.  2.2.   Student flows  The cohorts 2013/14 to 2023/24 up until June 2024 of bachelor's psychology programs were subjected to a student flow visualization method previously established ( Loder, 2024 ). It shows how students progress through their student lifecycles. The diagram in   Fig. 1   shows the relative frequencies of students in different phases, beginning with their school type, up to doctoral programs. Psychology is among the programs with the highest ratios of active students and with one of the highest graduation rates at the university.  Among all students, 40 % came from schools of foreign countries, 24 % from scientific high schools and 20 % from academic high schools. Most of the students (81 %) started their first semester   “ active ” , which means they accomplished eight or more ECTS credits during their first semester, while 19 % did not. Around 53 % of the beginners graduated from the bachelor's program, 18 % dropped out and 29 % of programs have been enrolled in June 2024. Of all beginners, 48 % started actively and graduated, which is 60 % of all active beginners. Among all be -  ginners, 5 % started inactively and graduated, which is around 25 % of all inactive beginners, and around 10 % started inactively and dropped out. In the group of bachelor's graduates, 80 % started a consecutive master's program psychology and 10 % a non-consecutive master's program, e.g., Ethics, Global Studies or others. Among the bachelor's graduates, 41 % also graduated from a master's program, 12 % dropped out and 37 % were still enrolled in June 2024.   < 2 % among all bache -  lor's graduates and around 1 % of all students started a doctoral program.  The table in   Appendix B   is used to estimate the graduation ratio. Excluding enrolled programs, over all cohorts and admission ranking numbers, the mean percentage of graduates was 75 %. Using the administrative database, a descriptive analysis over the same cohorts for all students at the University of Graz shows that the mean ratio for bachelor's programs of all fields of studies is 18 %, from the cohorts 13 W to 20 W 24 %; which is eight semesters, i.e., the minimum required time to finish bachelor's programs plus two tolerance semesters for the winter semester 2020/21 to the summer semester 2024. It needs to be noted that multiple enrollments per student are possible, skewing the results downwards if more than one program is closed. Around one third of all students enrolls in more than one program.  2.3.   Variables  The sociodemographic and -economic variables used to describe the sample were used as independent measures in the analyses. Various performance metrics and information on students, e.g., their age at different critical points, were also retrieved from the databases. The major outcome variable of this study was the ranking of students in the admission exams. This variable specifies the placement of each student in the exam, with 1 being the best and 230 the maximum. It is calculated from the individual parts of the admission exam, by summarizing the number of correct answers and ranking the results. The following metric variables were used in the analyses and descriptive statistics on them can be found in   Table 2 . The table is separated in psychology students and those students, who got an admission, but enrolled in a different program:  •   ranking: describes the number of the placement of each student; ranges from 1 to 230.  •   age university entrance: the age of students on obtaining the uni -  versity entrance qualification.  •   age enrollment: the age of students on starting of the psychology bachelor's program.  •   age end: the age of students on ending the bachelor's program, either as graduate or dropout.  Fig. 1.   Student flow visualization of bachelor's psychology students in the cohorts 2013/14 to 2023/24.  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  4

Page 1:
Student performance correlates of psychology admission exam scores and the number of places for students  Alexander Karl Ferdinand Loder   *  University of Graz, Department for Performance and Quality Management, Graz, Austria  A R T I C L E   I N F O  Keywords:  Academic analytics  Admission exams  Psychology  Student performance  Student retention  A B S T R A C T  University admission test rankings are related to later student performance. Austria (Europe) faces amendments to the psychotherapy law, introducing a polyvalent bachelor's program in psychology, enabling admission for both a master's program in psychology and psychotherapy. Psychology is in high demand at public universities and has restricted access. This study aimed to answer the question whether increasing the number of places for psychology students can be recommended in the Austrian university system. Objective data of administrative university databases was merged, resulting in a sample of 1323 bachelor's psychology students of the cohorts from 2013/14 to 2023/24. Admission exam results, student performance metrics, the outcome (graduation/ dropout) and sociodemographic and -economic data was retrieved. Analyses showed low to moderate correla -  tions between the rankings in the admission exam and later performance, different for graduates and dropouts in psychology and students, who were admitted, but enrolled elsewhere. Logistic regression models showed that rankings can predict students' outcomes. Based on graduation rates, results were extrapolated from 230 current places. Results suggest that 376 to 470 students in total may be admitted. The results of this study can help policymakers, university systems and university managers (re-)evaluate the number of places for bachelor's psychology students.  1.   Introduction  In university systems around the world, there are degree programs that have restricted access. One reason for this can be university infra -  structure, such as facilities or laboratories. They can play a crucial role in student progress ( Ramli et al., 2018 ). Not being able to attend courses as a student caused by restrictions of a university's low infrastructural ca -  pacity, will undeniably set one back in their time to graduate. Programs in high demand can get place restrictions by law ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2022 ) or be subjected to other limi -  tations and requirements not every student will be able to meet ( S  ́ andor, 2020 ). Not all students will graduate due to their cognitive abilities, which are influenced by several variables, e.g., motivation, self-efficacy expectations, the perception of performance or satisfaction with courses ( Díaz Mújica et al., 2019 ). Therefore, admission exams should filter future students and leave those with the highest performance potential in the system. It could be shown in various studies that there are mod -  erate and strong associations between admission criteria and early performance in different degree programs (pharmacy, informatics, not specified), and student groups ( Al-Alwan, 2009 ;   Fabito et al., 2015 ;  Kuncel et al., 2005 ;   Pol  ́ a ˇ ckov  ́ a   &   Svato ˇ sov  ́ a, 2013 ;   Sulphey et al., 2018 ;  Tesema, 2014 ), with inconclusive results for some others, i.e., samples of students from nursing, medical sciences and clinical nutrition ( Alamoudi et al., 2021 ). Admission test results can also predict grade point average upon graduation of first semester students ( Kwon, 2015 ) as well as the time to graduation of first semesters and high-school seniors ( Galla et al., 2019 ). However, high school grade point average has a stronger effect for the correlation with time to graduation compared to the admission exam ( Galla et al., 2019 ). Previous research showed that medical school entrance exams lead to a reduced dropout risk among the students remaining ( O'Neill et al., 2011 ). Student demographics, background and pre-university characteristics are other important performance pre -  dictors of first-semester students ( Ishitani, 2006 ;   Jones-White et al., 2010 ). For instance, first-generation enrollment and a younger age show associations with student success in sociology ( Luna   &   Winters, 2017 ;  Zyl-Schalekamp   &   Mthombeni, 2015 ). Socioeconomic status is related to admission test scores of first semesters. Controlling for the influence reduces   the   correlation   between   academic   performance   and   the  *   Universit  ̈ atsplatz 3/I, 8010 Graz, Austria.  E-mail address:   alexander.loder@uni-graz.at .  Contents lists available at   ScienceDirect  Acta Psychologica  journal homepage:   www.elsevier.com/locate/actpsy  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2024.104523  Received 22 July 2024; Received in revised form 4 October 2024; Accepted 7 October 2024  Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  Available   online   14   October   2024  0001-6918/©   2024   The   Author(s).   Published   by   Elsevier   B.V.   This   is   an   open   access   article   under   the   CC   BY-NC-ND   license   ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-  nc-nd/4.0/ ).

Page 3:
study aims to answer the research question whether increasing the number of places for psychology students can be recommended for policymakers and university management in the current university system of Austria. This is done by exploratively obtaining evidence on correlations between the ranking in the psychology admission exam and later   student   performance   measures.   Additionally,   this   study   tests whether the ranking or the number of repeated attempts on the exam can predict the final outcome of students, i.e., graduation or dropout. Predictions on the number of students to be admitted on basis of grad -  uation rates and the results of the analyses are done. The analyses are repeated for students, who are admitted to psychology, but enroll in a different program, to test whether the admission exam rankings are related to general student performance or specific to the discipline. This study also controls the ranking results for differences in sociodemo -  graphic and -economic dimensions. Important implications for policy -  makers, psychology admission design and university governance in other university systems worldwide are expected, as the results can give valuable information on strategic decisions on psychology bachelor's programs' admission numbers.  2.   Method  2.1.   Data background and sample characteristics  2.1.1.   Data background  The data was part of administrative databases of the University of Graz, Austria (Europe). It is among the largest universities of Austria, with around 30,000 enrolled degree programs per year. The raw data consisted of two distinct datasets from two independent databases. This is because information on the admission exams also includes data of people potentially never starting a degree program at this university. Therefore, the university keeps the admission data separate from the large database of student administrative data, which was the second data source for this study. Proceeding from the admission exams' data, information on all applicants for the entrance exams for the academic years 2013/14 to 2023/24 was obtained.  2.1.2.   Admission exam design  The number of places for students at the University of Graz has been negotiated with the ministry and is set to 230 ( Federal Ministry of Ed -  ucation, Science and Research, 2021b, 2022 ). Admission exams are held once per year in summer, meaning that students can only start a psy -  chology bachelor's program at the beginning of a winter semester. Co -  horts are therefore designated by the application year's last two digits and   “ W ”   for the winter semester. The exam consists of three separate parts: 1) knowledge, 2) logic, 3) English language understanding. 1) For the first part, students must prepare for a multiple-choice test by learning predefined chapters of a general book on psychology. 2) The logic part includes multiple choice questions on statistics, matrices and other related cognitive tests. 3) Applicants must read three English texts on psychological research and fill in a multiple-choice form at the end. For most applicants, English is not their first language.  In the raw data, scores for the three parts were available for all co -  horts except 13W. They were summed up per participant and then ranked from highest to lowest, which was used as the final placement. Descriptive statistics on the individual scores per cohort can be found in  Appendix A . It should be noted that the test scores in 14 W and from the 20 W cohort onwards were different from the others, as indicated in the maximum column. Between the cohorts, the descriptive measures show consistent and similar values per year.  2.1.3.   Matching procedure and final sample  As there was no unique IDs that could be matched between appli -  cants' and student data, first and last names in lowercase, stripped of whitespace, as well as the date of birth were used as merging indicators. Information   on   student   performance   and   sociodemographic   and -economic variables was retrieved from the administrative database. In total, 674 students (27 %) with an admission to psychology programs could not be matched; either because of writing errors in the names and dates or because they passed the exam, but never started a bachelor's program psychology at this university. After the matching process, only finished programs were kept, which means that all programs with a status   “ currently enrolled ”   at the beginning of June 2024 were filtered out. The data that could not be matched also includes students from newer cohorts, decreasing the percentage of non-mergeable cases. This also means that the number of students in the datasets decreases the younger the cohorts, as more students have not yet finished their pro -  grams. The final datasets contained 1323 individual students. Absolute and relative frequencies on the sample characteristics can be found  Table 1 , frequencies of the student outcomes (graduation / dropout) per admission rank can be found in   Appendix B .  The variable mobility was defined as students having completed at least one semester abroad during their studies. School type is based on which school students had gotten their university entrance qualification before entering the university system. University degree of parents is a categorial variable students fill in at the beginning of their first enroll -  ment, declaring 1) if they are   “ first generation students ” , i.e., neither of their parents has a university degree, or 2) if either of them has gradu -  ated in the past. The migration status defines whether students and their parents were born in Austria (no migration), they migrated to Austria (first generation) or one or both of their parents migrated to Austria (second generation). Nationality is defined as the citizenship of students and is divided into Austria, other EU-countries and non-EU countries. For the variables university degree of parents and migration status data can be missing unsystematically in older cohorts, as filling in these  Table 1  Descriptive statistics for sociodemographic and   – economic variables.  Variable   Frequencies  N   1323  Cohort   13 W: 172 (13 %) 14 W: 168 (13 %) 15 W: 185 (14 %) 16 W: 183 (14 %) 17 W: 176 (13 %) 18 W: 163 (12 %) 19 W: 137 (10 %) 20 W: 101 (8 %) 21 W: 24 (2 %) 22 W: 12 (0.90 %) 23 W: 2 (0.20 %)  Outcome status   Graduation: 991 (75 %) Dropout: 332 (25 %)  Mobility   Outgoing: 127 (10 %) No mobility: 1195 (90 %)  Gender   Women: 895 (68 %) Men: 428 (32 %)  School type   Academic high-school: (22 %) Scientific high-school: (23 %) Commercial high-school: 59 (5 %) Technical high-school: 72 (5 %) Economic high-school: 73 (6 %) Schools from foreign countries: 433 (33 %) Other school types: 75 (6 %) Missing (removed): 22 (2 %)  University degree of parents   No degree: 591 (45 %) One parent: 119 (9 %) Both parents: 91 (7 %) Missing: 522 (40 %)  Migration status   No migration: 510 (39 %) First generation migration: 287 (22 %) Second generation migration (one parent): 36 (3 %) Second generation migration (both parents): 16 (1 %) Missing: 474 (36 %)  Nationality   Austria:861 (65 %) EU: 450 (34 %) Non-EU countries: 12 (0.90 %)  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  3

Page 6:
outcome status as independent measure was used as a control for possible interaction effects between graduates and dropouts. A one- factorial ANOVA model with outcome status as dependent variable was calculated as a control to be able to reconcile the ANOVA results with the logistic regression models.  3.   Results  3.1.   Admission rankings, student characteristics and performance  Multiple Pearson correlations were performed between the ranking of students and metric performance and student variables in subset of students, who graduated. The results are depicted in   Fig. 2 . Significant correlations could be obtained for the overall study duration in semes -  ters,   r   =   0.11,   p   =   .001, the mean ECTS credits per semester,   r   =     0.09,  p   =   .004, grade point average,   r   =   0.26,   p   <   .001 and the number of failed exams,   r   =   0.20,   p   <   .001. The lower (better) the ranking place -  ment, the shorter overall time to graduation, the more ECTS credits are accomplished on average per semester, the lower (better) the grade point average, the lower the number of failed exams and the other way round. No significant correlations were obtained for age variables, the mean number of courses, the number of passed exams and exams per semester and the number of admission attempts.  Multiple Pearson correlations were performed between the ranking of students and metric performance and student variables in subset of students, who dropped out. The results are depicted in   Fig. 3 . Significant correlations could be obtained for grade point average,   r   =   0.25,   p   <  .001, and the number of failed exams,   r   =   0.20,   p   =   .001. The lower (better) the ranking placement, the lower (better) the grade point average and the lower the number of failed exams and the other way round. No significant correlations were obtained for the age at the end of the program, the age at enrollment, the age at the university entrance qualification, the mean number of courses and exams per semester, the number of admission attempts and the number of passed exams. Con -  trary to the graduation subset, no effects were obtained for the overall study duration in semesters until dropout or graduation, the mean ECTS credits per semester and the number of passed exams, while an effect was obtained for the age at university entrance.  The analyses were repeated for students with a valid admission to psychology, who enrolled in a different program in the same semester. The scatterplots are shown in   Appendix D . For graduates, significant correlations were revealed between the ranking and the age at the university entrance qualification,   r   =   0.26,   p   =   .010, as well as   M   ECTS,  r   =   0.26,   p   =   .034. The lower (better) the ranking, the younger students' age at obtaining the entrance qualification as well as the more ECTS credits per semester, and the other way round for both correlations. For dropouts, significant correlations were obtained with the age at drop -  ping out,   r   =   0.40,   p   =   .023, and the age at enrollment,   r   =   0.44,   p   =  Fig. 2.   Scatterplots and correlation diagrams for graduates, including a linear regression line with 95 % CI; * marks significant effects of p   <   .05.  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  6

Page 7:
.010. Both, the lower (better) the ranking, the younger students' age at dropping out and at enrollment.  3.2.   Student outcomes  The spread of the ranks has been visualized in a box plot per outcome status. The visualization is depicted in   Fig. 4 .  A logistic regression model with outcome status as dependent mea -  sure and the ranking as predictor showed a significant effect, Nagel -  kerke's   R 2   =   0.01,   b   =   0.003, odds   =   1.003,   p   =   .006, Wald statistic (1)   =  297.41,   CI   =   1.00 – 1.01. Increasing numbers in the ranking, i.e., worse rankings, are associated with dropping out and decreasing numbers are associated with graduation. Extrapolating the rank number, the coeffi -  cient   b   and the intercept of       1.41 are used to calculate the odds ratio of dropping out comparing rank 1 and the other fictive ranks as well as the probability to graduate (y   =   0) per fictive rank using the following formulae.  odds ratio   =   e b 0   + b 1   * rank   1  e b 0   + b 1   * rank n   =   e     1 . 41 + 0 . 003* rank   1  e     1 . 41 + 0 . 003* rank n   =   e     1 . 41 + 0 . 003* ( rank   1     rank n )  graduation probability P ( y   =   0 | rank ) =   1       1 1   +   e   ( b 0   + b 1   * rank )  =   1       1 1   +   e   (    1 . 41 + 0 . 003* rank )  On average over all cohorts, 75 % of students graduated, on uni -  versity level the ratio is 18 – 24 %. This mean ratio of 75 % to graduate from psychology is assumed for the first rank and extrapolated using the results of the odds ratios until those university-wide (lower) ratios are reached.   Since   no   admission   exams   and   rankings   are   available university-wide, the relationship between graduation ratio and odds ratio is used to estimate the number of fictive ranks. To obtain the extrapolated graduation ratios, the mean graduation ratio of 75 % is divided by the odds ratios. Using the fictive ranking numbers, proba -  bilities to graduate are calculated and added for these ranks.   Table 3  shows the extrapolation results. The probability to graduate per rank is visualized in   Fig. 5 , the extrapolations of the graduation ratio for the assumptions of 57 % (the observed ratio for rank 1), 75 % (the observed overall ratio) and 100 % (the observed ratio for rank 2) as graduation ratio of rank 1 are visualized in   Appendix E .  Compared to rank number 1, the current maximum rank 230 is twice as likely to drop out and has a probability to graduate of 0.219. The extrapolation reveals that between 376 and 470 total students could be admitted until the university-wide dropout span is reached, but the corresponding probabilities to graduate decrease down to 0.169 and 0.120. These ranks are three and four times as likely to drop out compared to the first rank. As demonstrated by the extrapolation of the graduation ratios, using an assumed ratio of 1.00 for rank 1, rank 470 corresponds with an estimated graduation ratio of 0.24; 0.18 is reached  Fig. 3.   Scatterplots and correlation diagrams for dropouts, including a linear regression line with 95 % CI; * marks significant effects of p   <   .05.  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  7

Page 10:
students with higher rankings have longer times to graduation and students with lower rankings have shorter times ( Galla et al., 2019 ). This effect was not present for dropouts, which means the ranking was not correlated with the time to leave the program. A study on medical school admission tests that compared the odds of dropping out from admission by grades and admission tests reported lower odds of dropping out in the tested group ( O'Neill et al., 2011 ). Two other studies also showed reduced dropout rates after the introduction of an entrance exam ( Kraft et al., 2013 ;   Leiser   &   Wolter, 2015 ). These results on the difference in time to graduate and dropping out as well as workload for graduates indicate that the relationship between student performance and the ranking in psychology admission exams cannot be random. This implies that some of the inactive students may be worse performers than higher ranked ones and thus be inactive. However, their time to drop out is not correlated with the ranking. Previous works suggest that the introduc -  tion of admission exams per se is related to lower odds of dropping out in a field of study ( Leiser   &   Wolter, 2015 ;   O'Neill et al., 2011 ). Due to passing such an exam, students that are allowed to enroll may have a higher grit, i.e., a non-cognitive perseverance of effort. The concept of grit   is related to   first semester performance, but not to retention ( Broghammer, 2017 ). Therefore, no effects were found for the time to dropping out.  Compared to the psychology students, those with a valid admission to psychology, who started a different program, showed different cor -  relations with student performance. Except two positive correlations between the ranking and the age at obtaining the university entrance qualification and mean ECTS credits per semester, there were no other significant correlations. In the dropout subset, the age at enrollment at the age at dropout became significant. In general, the lack of correla -  tions makes sense as large parts of the test concentrate on psychology as a discipline. The content that was learned should test academic readi -  ness for enrollment in a bachelor's program psychology and should therefore   show no relationship with performance of students who enrolled in a different program, e.g., molecular biology.  The correlation with the age at obtaining the entrance qualification very likely became significant due to outliers that were not removed by being above twice the standard deviation of the variable. Seven students in the remaining scatterplot are above the age of 21, explaining the ef -  fect. Therefore, it should also not be interpreted as relevant. The cor -  relations with age variables in the dropout dataset also showed several students on the lower and upper end with low frequencies that may be interpreted as outliers. The correlations disappear on repeating the an -  alyses using 1.5 times the standard deviation.  The correlation with mean ECTS credits per semester seems to be less influenced by outliers. It shows that students do more ECTS credits per semester the higher (worse) their ranking, which is the opposite direc -  tion of the effect among psychology students. This effect was not present among dropouts and may be explained by indecisive students. They may take the admission exam before making their final decision which pro -  gram to enroll and choose a different program in the end, even with a valid admission to psychology. Since the registration for the exam ends in July, but enrollment in other programs is possible until the end of October, students interested in psychology must register early. It is known that academic readiness can be an indicator for later perfor -  mance ( Lemmens et al., 2011 ). Due to the ranking potentially indicating academic readiness for psychology, a worse ranking means less readi -  ness for psychology, but potentially for another program. This may be one reason why a higher workload is accomplished elsewhere with higher rankings in the psychology admission exam. Future research is needed to get more insight into this result.  No correlations were obtained for the number of passed exams, the mean number of courses and exams per semester and the number of previous admission attempts in the graduation subset. There were also no correlations with age variables. However, it is known that student performance in older adults needs to be differentiated from those of younger ones and that applying the same explanation models to both groups would be inappropriate ( Kasworm   &   Pike, 1994 ). The Austrian school system enables most students to achieve the university entrance qualification between 18 and 21 years with a sample mean of 19 years ( SD   =   1.57 years) and a higher age can be considered entering non- traditionally. Previous research showed that non-traditional students, i.e., those who enter the university system via non-traditional means, have a slight disadvantage in academic performance ( Cantwell et al., 2001 ). Due to eliminating outliers above twice the standard deviation of each variable, older students have been removed from the dataset because of their low frequency. They do not represent the largest part of the population, which gives reason to their exclusion. Still, repeating the analyses without outlier elimination reveals a weak correlation between then age of obtaining the university entrance qualification and the admission   ranks   in   the   subset   of   dropouts.   This   correlation   upon including older students may indicate that they experience such disad -  vantages and drop out. This also reduces the frequency of older students in the graduation group, which is why the correlation is absent, even after including all cases. In the dropout subset there were also no effects for the mean number of courses and exams per semester and the number of admission attempts.  4.2.   Student outcomes  Additional analyses were done to test whether the ranking or the number of repeated attempts on the exam can predict the final outcome of students, i.e., graduation or dropout. A weak effect was obtained for higher (worse) ranking numbers predicting dropping out and the other way round. The odds ratio showing a value of 0.003 corresponds with a 1.003-fold increase in the odds of dropping out per rank increase. The results indicate a long-term stability of the admission ranking to predict student outcomes. A   b   of 0.003 may seem very small, but it needs to be put into perspective of several hundreds of potential students and ranks, as shown by decay curves from the logistic regression model. Based on the overall graduation rate at the University of Graz, an increase in the psychology student numbers would be possible until the graduation rates match. However, the probability to graduate decreases accordingly and needs to be taken into consideration as well. Given generally high graduation rates for psychology, raising the numbers beyond a certain estimated dropout or graduation rate is a decision that needs to be made by university managers. What must not be neglected in that decision is the teaching capacity of the field of psychology at a university.  Although the rankings could significantly predict the outcome, the effect size of the model (Nagelkerke's   R 2 ) is still small. Repeating the analysis with all main study variables as predictors, the ranking does no longer explain variance of the student status. However, the overall model shows a very high explanation of the model's variance ( Backhaus et al., 2006 ). This is the case, as dropouts and graduates can be distin -  guished very well in how long they study, how many exams they accumulate, their age and other variables. The model illustrates that student success and retention is more dependent on other dimensions that can change the outcome. Previous research identified demographic variables, academic readiness, financial aspects of students ( Barbera et al., 2020 ), social support ( Nieuwoudt   &   Pedler, 2023 ), the wish to increase the social status, higher chances of better earnings, career growth prospects ( Faj ˇ cíkov  ́ a   &   Urbancov  ́ a, 2019 ) and other dimensions as important for success.  In the dataset of students, who enrolled in other programs, there was no significant effect in predicting the outcome from the rankings. This indicates that the admission exam may test the specific academic readiness for a bachelor's program psychology, as discussed above. In the absence of correlations between performance parameters, except for student workload as ECTS credits, the exam is not likely to measure general academic readiness.  Descriptive student flows indicate that being inactive in the first semester ( <   8 ECTS credits) is a good predictor of dropping out later. Previous works found correlations between entrance assessment scores  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  10

Page 12:
4.5.   Implications for research, policy and practice  This study demonstrated that a standardized admission exam in a country-wide highly demanded bachelor's program psychology corre -  lates with later student performance and that it can predict the outcome status   (graduation   or   dropout)   of   students.   Sociodemographic   and -economic dimensions showed no differences, as did not the number of repeated admission attempts, indicating fairness of the test. Differences with the group of students who passed the admission exam and enrolled elsewhere were obtained. More research is needed to see whether indecisiveness is a reason for future students to take the admission exam, but to enroll elsewhere in the end. This can lead to the implementation and improvement of support structures in student counseling. The re -  sults indicate that the exam tests academic readiness in psychology but is worse in testing general academic readiness as hardly any correlations with performance metrics of other fields of study were found.  Policymakers, curriculum designers and university managers should be aware that effects were obtained, but only correlations between rankings and later grade point average were moderate. The rest of the effects was rather small in this study. Considering the completely objective data from administrative databases, which would not be the case for questionnaire designs and a potentially high generalizability of the results, it can be concluded that admission exam rankings have value but are not everything. Student workload for both graduates and drop -  outs as well as the time to graduation was correlated with the rankings. The scores can therefore not be random, but effects were still low to moderate. It can be concluded that inactive students and those who drop out contain a certain percentage of lower performers, but there should also be outliers that show this behavior for other reasons not related to being incapable of graduating from a bachelor's program in psychology. The other way round, there may also be very high performers among higher (worse) ranked students.  Answering the research question, increasing the number of students admitted to a bachelor's program at Austrian universities both can be recommended under careful consideration of dropout rates and uni -  versity resource management. In the light of the results on students' performance and outcomes, increasing the number will raise the number of lower ranked low-performers. However, there will also be low- performers in higher ranks, the same way as there will be high per -  formers among lower ranks. Increasing the number of places will always produce a certain percentage of inactive students and dropouts as well as high(er) performers and graduates. Decay curves for the possible num -  ber of students to be admitted have been proposed on the basis of prevalent graduation ratios for rank 1 and the general graduation ratio at the University of Graz. Based on currently 230 places, between 376 and 470 could be admitted in total until the bachelor's program psy -  chology would reach the same graduation ratio as other fields of study. However,   policymakers   and   university   managers   need   to   decide whether this is wanted or not. Lowering the graduation rate from a mean 75 % to 18 – 24 % may lead to more loss than benefit for an institution. Teaching capacity, costs and academic staff need to be evaluated first and then be brought into relation with the number of places for students, corresponding with an acceptable graduation rate.  On an international level, this study helps bachelor's psychology administrators in (re-)evaluating the number of students to be admitted. Using the graduation rate in psychology and the results on places for students as a guide can be a way to improve admission outcomes in other university systems. The more a country's university system or psychol -  ogy   admission   process   differs   from   Austria's   the   stronger   is   the recommendation to use another university's administrative data to replicate the decay curves of this study, as the parameters may differ. Other universities may also be able to improve their admission test fairness by reviewing admission and policy differences in their univer -  sity system compared to Austria. As this study also included analyses on dropouts and students with other enrollments, it can be used as a base for future works on student retention and admission test design.  5.   Conclusion  This study aimed to obtain evidence whether increasing the number of places for psychology students can be recommended for policymakers and university management in the current university system of Austria. It was demonstrated that the standardized admission exam in a country- wide highly demanded bachelor's program psychology is fair and cor -  relates with later student performance. The results of the admission exam can predict the outcome status (graduation or dropout) of stu -  dents. The effect was not strong and performance variables throughout the semesters can explain more variance of the outcome than the initial admission ranking. However, extrapolating the regression results and comparing psychology students' and the university's general graduation rates yields estimates of how many students can be admitted until the rates match. Increasing the number of students will inevitably lead to an increase in the group of inactive lower performers and dropouts, but it cannot   be   concluded   that   the   threshold   of   well-performers   would already be exhausted. The results of this study can help university sys -  tems and university managers (re-)evaluate the number of places for bachelor's psychology students. Acceptable graduation to dropout ra -  tios, teaching capacity, costs and academic staff need to be considered when making policy decisions.  CRediT authorship contribution statement  Alexander Karl Ferdinand Loder:   Writing   –   review   &   editing, Writing   –   original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Soft -  ware, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.  Ethics approval  The analysis of the data and the permission for publication have been approved in a works agreement between the Performance- and Quality Management Department and the works committee of the University of Graz, called   “ Rahmen-BV IKT 2019 ” , which includes ethics approval. Furthermore, data analyses on student data by staff departments of the university is regulated by law, defining analyses as a means of increasing graduation rates of the Austrian universities as an obligation (Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2002; see references in manuscript).  Funding  The author acknowledges the financial support by the University of Graz.  Declaration of competing interest  The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  12

Page 9:
A two-factorial ANOVA with ranking as dependent variable and outcome status and university degree of parents as independent vari -  ables showed no significant main effect outcome status,   F (1, 795)   =  1.05,   p   =   .305,   η p 2   =   0.001, no significant main effect university degree of parents,   F( 2, 795)   =   0.57,   p   =   .564,   η p 2   =   0.001, and no significant interaction effect,   F (2 , 795 )   =   0.71,   p   =   .491,   η p 2   =   0.002. There are no differences in the ranking dependent on the university degree of parents.  A two-factorial ANOVA with ranking as dependent variable and outcome status and migration status as independent variables showed no significant main effect outcome status,   F (1, 841)   =   0.11,   p   =   .736,   η p 2  <   0.001, no significant main effect migration status,   F (3, 841)   =   0.50,   p  =   .680,   η p 2   =   0.002, and no significant interaction effect,   F (3 , 841 )   =  0.23,   p   =   .879,   η p 2   =   0.001. There are no differences in the ranking dependent on the migration status.  A two-factorial ANOVA with ranking as dependent variable and outcome status and nationality as independent variables showed no significant main effect outcome status,   F (1, 1317)   =   0.07,   p   =   .796,   η p 2   <  0.001, no significant main effect nationality,   F (2, 1317)   =   2.22,   p   =  .109,   η p 2   =   0.003, and no significant interaction effect,   F (2 ,   1317)   =   0.95,  p   =   .385,   η p 2   =   0.001. There are no differences in the ranking dependent on the nationality.  A one-factorial ANOVA with ranking as dependent variable and outcome status independent variable was calculated. It showed signifi -  cant differences in the ranking,   F (1,1321)   =   7.54,   p   =   .006,   η p 2   =   0.01. Students who graduate had a lower (better) ranking in the admission exam ( M   =   113.16,   SD   =   66.67) compared to those, who drop out ( M   =  124.72,   SD   =   65.69).  4.   Discussion  4.1.   Admission rankings, student characteristics and performance  This study aimed to answer the research question whether increasing the number of places for psychology students can be recommended for policymakers and university management in the current university system of Austria. Explorative correlation analyses were conducted to obtain evidence on correlations between the ranking in the psychology admission exam and later student performance measures. The analyses were done separately for graduates and dropouts and repeated for stu -  dents with valid admission to psychology, who enrolled in a different program in the same semester.  The results showed that for graduates and dropouts the lower (bet -  ter) the ranking placement in the admission exam, the lower (better) the grade point average and the lower the number of failed exams. Only in the graduation subset, rankings negatively correlated with ECTS credits. Exams and ECTS credits can be invertedly related and they share vari -  ance, as failing exams does not lead to students acquiring ECTS credits ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2022 ). Students could theoretically take an unlimited number of exams, but acquire no credits, if they fail all of them. ECTS credits are only accumulated by passing exams. The effect was likely not present for dropouts, since there is less variance in a dataset of students with a higher number of failed exams compared to graduates and there is also a higher chance among dropouts for leaving the university without taking or passing any exams. Similar to previous studies on different fields of study, the ranking in the admission exam in this study was also correlated with grade point average upon graduation ( Kwon, 2015 ) and also in the dropout dataset. These effects showed the strongest correlation coefficients in the study for both subsets. Also similar to previous works, this study found that  Fig. 5.   Probability to graduate per admission rank.  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  9

Page 11:
and the graduation rates of students ( Stumpf   &   Stanley, 2002 ). Another study found a relationship between undergraduate grade point average and later completion of doctoral studies of graduate students ( Verostek et al., 2021 ). However, the effects were stronger compared to this study. Similar to this finding, also the correlation analyses with performance measures showed no strong effects. This indicates that the admission test moderately discriminates between later grade point average and other metrics, but it does not discriminate (well) over the long term for stu -  dents' outcomes, i.e., graduating and dropping out. Adding the perfor -  mance indicators to a regression model, the admission ranking does no longer explain variance of the outcome status, indicating that other di -  mensions are more important to predict the final outcome. Since the results showed that the ranking is not related with time to dropout, but with time to graduation, ranking scores cannot be random, but dropouts may be influenced more by other dimensions as well. Dropping out is a multidimensional process of personal, academic, economic, social and institutional influences ( Alban   &   Mauricio, 2019 ). Therefore, explaining variance of graduation and dropout as a continuum in the analyses may need   more   complex   models,   including   those   aforementioned   di -  mensions,   which   are   not   present   in   a   university's   administrative database.  Another analysis showed that there is no difference in the mean rankings dependent on the group of students, i.e., psychology students and those, who enroll elsewhere. The results show that those, who perform worse in the admission exam, are not more prone to choose another program. Who enrolls elsewhere is independent of the ranking, but the ratio of dropouts is higher compared to the psychology students. This adds to the argument that this group of non-psychology students may consist mostly of indecisive students, with indecisiveness playing a role in student retention ( Germeijs   &   Verschueren, 2011 ;   Ishitani   &  Snider, 2006 ).  No relationship was found for the outcome and the number of admission attempts. Previous research found that those repeating the entrance exam to medical school had a lower academic performance later ( Price   &   Dunne, 1990 ). The logistic regression analyses did not find evidence for the outcome of students. Furthermore, no correlations were obtained for the number of repeated attempts to a psychology program with the ranking in the exams. Although there were correlations be -  tween the ranking and performance indicators as well as the outcome, the number of repeated attempts seems to be irrelevant for the ultimate outcome of graduating or dropping out.  4.3.   Sociodemographic and -economic dimensions  As sociodemographic and -economic dimensions are known in -  fluences on admission scores ( Sackett et al., 2009 ) as well as later stu -  dent performance ( Ishitani, 2006 ;   Jones-White et al., 2010 ;   Luna   &  Winters, 2017 ;   Zyl-Schalekamp   &   Mthombeni, 2015 ), this study also controlled the ranking results for differences in sociodemographic and -economic dimensions. No influences in the ranking scores were found for school type, migration status, university degree of parents (first generation students) and nationality. This indicates that the admission exam is able to establish fairness in these dimensions. However, men had lower (better) ranks than women. Nevertheless, the effect size was very small and the sample contains more women than men, which means more variance in this group. Furthermore, the sample size was rather large, making it more likely that the statistical tests become significant. Although these factors were present, making the outcome less relevant, there are research results on women scoring worse than man in uni -  versity   entrance   exams,   for   instance   by   omitting   more   items ( Pekkarinen, 2015 ). Mixed results also exist, finding that women apply to more competitive programs and perform similarly well compared to men, but have worse scores at very selective universities ( Jurajda   &  Munich, 2008 ). Another   study reported that admission scores can underpredict achievement for women, but that gender differences can also be related to the male-female composition of students in different fields of study ( Karlsson   &   Wikstr  ̈ om, 2021 ), which is in line with the sample composition of this study. The observed difference in gender should not affect the test fairness, given the small effect size.  The results also showed that students, who take a semester or a longer   timeframe   abroad   during   their   studies,   had   lower   (better) ranking scores in the admission test. It is known that students who do a short time mobility of one semester to study abroad show positive as -  sociations with learning performance metrics ( Coker et al., 2018 ). Considering the correlations between student performance and the admission rankings in this study, generally more successful and initia -  tive students may seek to study abroad compared to others.  4.4.   Limitations and methodological considerations  This study was done on different cohorts, which also means that students were subjected to different curriculum versions of psychology. In the timeframe from 2013/14 to 2023/24, two different versions with slight changes were part of the data. The first one reached from 2011/12 to 2015/16, the latest one was introduced 2016/17 and is still ongoing. Although there were no substantial changes to the overall curriculum structure, some minimal effects on student performance may be ex -  pected. Changes of teachers on large and impactful courses may be possible and affect how fast and efficient learners progress with the curriculum. Those factors were not controlled, since no large effects were expected.  Although newer cohorts of 2016/17 and above were subjected to the same curriculum version, filtering by completed programs, i.e., leaving out those who are still enrolled, reduces the sample in the later cohorts. This also means that the variance of repeated admission attempts is a bit limited, as potential students, who failed the admission exam, might return in future instances. Also, possible changes in the admission exam over the years might have some impact on the selection of students, but cannot be controlled in this study. On the one hand, the reduction of cases in younger cohorts means there is only little data from the COVID- 19 timeframe, which could have negatively influenced the results due to the changes in teaching and learning during this timeframe. On the other hand, this also means that influences of possible innovations (e.g., dis -  tance learning), changes in teaching or support structures for newer cohorts are not present in the data. Although this keeps the data con -  stant, a lack or presence of these influences cannot be controlled for and generalizability for the current situation is slightly reduced.  The general generalizability of the results depends on the university system and the admission exam. In Austria, a standardized admission test is conducted and the university system has a few unique regulations, possibly not present in other systems. However, since the findings of this study are similar to what was reported previously from other university systems in different fields of study and countries, a high generalizability and interpretability for psychology admission exams and student per -  formance can be expected for different contexts and systems as well.  It should not be neglected that a certain   “ survivorship bias ”   may be present in the data. This is because students, who are still enrolled, but started in earlier cohorts may have very long timeframes to graduation or dropping out. They are not part of the sample, but also belong to the population of psychology students. Although they are not of interest in answering the research question due to falling in the inactive group, they may show up in future samples when trying to replicate the find -  ings. It needs to be taken into consideration that results may slightly change in a long(er) term study's point of view.  Most ANOVA models used to check for test fairness showed no sig -  nificant main effect outcome status with ranking as the dependent var -  iable, although a logistic regression model was able to significantly predict outcome status from the ranking. A one-factorial ANOVA model was calculated and showed a significant difference in the ranking. It can be concluded that the reason for the absence of the main effect outcome status in the two-factorial models is the inclusion of a second indepen -  dent variable, masking the effect.  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  11

Page 19:
Appendix E.   Extrapolated graduation rates using three different base rates for rank 1  Appendix F.   Results of the logistic regression model using student status as outcome and all performance indicators as predictors  Variable   b   Odds   Wald Statistic   df   p   95 %   CI  Ranking   0.001   1.00   0.03   1   0.857   0.99 – 1.01  Age end       5.01   0.002   10.07   1   0.002*   0.00 – 0.15  Age enrollment   4.80   0.01   9.53   1   0.002*   5.76 – 2548.67  Age university entrance   0.06   121.16   0.05   1   0.829   0.64 – 1.75  Duration   2.94   1.06   16.75   1   < 0.001*   4.62 – 77.15  M   courses per semester   0.61   18.89   1.57   1   0.210   0.71 – 4.74  M   ECTS   0.07   1.07   0.47   1   0.494   0.88 – 1.29  M   exams       0.89   0.41   4.32   1   0.038*   0.18 – 0.95  M   grades   0.50   1.66   0.16   1   0.693   0.14 – 20.23  n   admission attempts       0.63   0.53   0.73   1   0.394   0.13 – 2.26  n   not passed exams   0.09   1.10   0.39   1   0.531   0.82 – 1.47  n   passed exams       0.39   < 0.001   39.32   1   < 0.001*   0.6 – 0.76  Data availability  Data cannot be made available due to being a large size dataset of internal university administrative data.  References  Al-Alwan, I. A. (2009). Association between scores in high school, aptitude and achievement exams and early performance in health science college.   Saudi Journal of Kidney Diseases and Transplantation, 20 (3), 448 – 453 .  Alamoudi, A. A., Fallatah, H. I., Eldakhakhny, B. M., Kamel, F. O., AlShawwa, L. A., & Elsamanoudy, A. Z. (2021). Relationship between admission criteria and academic performance in basic science courses in health science colleges in KAU.   BMC Medical Education, 21 , 1 – 8 .  Alban, M., & Mauricio, D. (2019). Predicting university dropout through data mining: A systematic literature.   Indian Journal of Science and Technology, 12 (4), 1 – 12 .  American Educational Research Association [AERA], American Psychological Association [APA], National Council on Measurement in Education [NCME]. (2014).  Standards for educational and psychological testing . Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association .  Assefa, M., & Sedgwick, R. (2004). The Bologna bachelor ’ s degree: An overview.   World Education News   &   Reviews, 17 (1) .  Backhaus, K., Erichson, B., Plinke, W., & Weiber, R. (2006).   Multivariate Analysemethoden: Eine anwendungsorientierte Einführung   (11th ed.). Berlin: Springer .  Barbera, S. A., Berkshire, S. D., Boronat, C. B., & Kennedy, M. H. (2020). Review of undergraduate student retention and graduation since 2010: Patterns, predictions, and recommendations for 2020.   Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory  &   Practice, 22 (2), 227 – 250 .  Beard, J., & Marini, J. (2018).   Validity of the SAT ®   for predicting first-year grades: 2013 SAT validity sample . New York: College Board .  Broghammer, S. M. (2017).   Grit as a predictor of academic success for first-time undergraduate students (dissertation) . Colorado: University of Northern Colorado .  Busato, V. V., Prins, F. J., Elshout, J. J., & Hamaker, C. (2000). Intellectual ability, learning style, personality, achievement motivation and academic success of  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  19

Page 2:
admission exam results, but does not eliminate the effect ( Sackett et al., 2009 ). In Austria (Europe), one of the highest demanded fields of study is psychology, which led to the introduction of place limits and admis -  sion exams by law ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2022 ;   University of Graz, 2023 ;   University of Vienna, 2023 ). Until 2024 university psychology education was separated from psychotherapy, which was not embedded in the classic European Bologna degree sys -  tem. This system has been introduced in the early 2000's, which led to a segmentation of the Austrian diploma program in psychology and the introduction of the international bachelor's   –   master's system. The old diploma type was a combined version of both degrees, with a longer overall required time to graduation, ending with a   “ magister (Mag.) ”  degree. To date, a graduation in a bachelor's program psychology only allows   consecutive   admission   to   the   master's   program   psychology (except for some generally open master's programs). Due to the recent amendment of the psychotherapy law, a new   “ polyvalent ”   bachelor's program in psychology will be introduced. This means that graduation enables students to enroll in the consecutive master's programs psy -  chology and psychotherapy ( Eller   &   Stumm, 2024 ;   Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2024a ). To be allowed to use the title  “ psychologist ” , graduation from a bachelor's and master's degree is a mandatory requirement ( National Assembly of Austria, 2019 ), possibly leading to a binary choice between a master's degree in psychology or psychotherapy for most students. These upcoming changes foster the question whether the current place restrictions should be lowered to enable more students to enroll in the future bachelor's programs psy -  chology at Austrian universities, as unknown percentages of students will decide between psychology or psychotherapy as their master's program. The research question has a high relevance for psychology bachelor's   admission   worldwide   and   university   systems   seeking   to optimize the number of admissions in specific fields of study.  1.1.   Psychology: student performance and admission  Students' motivations to pursue a career in psychology can be a general interest in the discipline and the desire to help others and oneself ( Harton   &   Lyons, 2003 ;   Nikolaenko et al., 2018 ;   Upmane et al., 2016 ). Intellectual ability and achievement motivation are correlated with success of psychology students ( Busato et al., 2000 ), while loneliness and the impostor phenomenon of psychology students ( Rokach   &   Bou -  lazreg, 2020 ), a lack of confidence ( Kumar   &   Jagacinski, 2006 ) and perceived intelligence in general ( Cozzarelli   &   Major, 1990 ) as well as other factors ( Rokach   &   Boulazreg, 2020 ) can be a hindrance to success.  The admission selection tests meet psychometric and legal standards, since they can have far-reaching consequences for potential students, such as later career choice. Several guidelines and norms have been established in this context ( American Educational Research Association [AERA], et al., 2014 ;   DIN, 2016 ;   International Organization for Stan -  dardization [ISO], 2011 ;   Tippins et al., 2018 ). Entrance exams can be based on evidence from international validity generalization, consen -  sual models of cognitive abilities and a taxonomy of a country's bache -  lor's degree in psychology ( Watrin et al., 2022 ). It is important that all applicants have the same opportunities to allow for fair competition ( American Educational Research Association [AERA], et al., 2014 ) and the tests need to be free of applicants being able to fake ( Viswesvaran   &  Ones, 1999 ), which happens in high-stakes situations, e.g., applications for jobs ( Donovan et al., 2014 ). Considering predictive validity and robustness against intentional distortions, standardized ability tests are state of the art in psychology admission ( Beard   &   Marini, 2018 ;   Kuncel et al., 2001 ;   Westrick et al., 2015 ).  1.2.   The Austrian university system in psychology  In Austria, the total number of places for the bachelor's programs in psychology over all 22 public universities (including technical and medicinal universities as well as universities of arts) is limited to 1300 ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2022 ). However, the field of psychology is highly requested ( University of Graz, 2023 ). For instance, at the University of Vienna, 485 places were demanded by 3761 applicants (1:8) in 2019/20 and by 1964 (1:4) applicants for the academic year 2022/23 ( University of Vienna, 2020 ;   University of Vienna, 2023 ;   Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2021a ). At the University of Graz, 230 places were requested by 1132 applicants (1:5) for the academic year 2022/23 ( University of Graz, 2023 ). This makes psychology a very selective bachelor's program in Austria. In addition, the country has a high relative amount of psy -  chology students from Germany, which has introduced the numerus clausus, i.e., university attendance in psychology based on the grade point average in school ( Neubauer et al., 2020 ).  In general, the Austrian university system does not allocate tuition fees to students. Those are only introduced when students cross the minimum required time to finish their degree program plus two addi -  tional semesters, known as tolerance timeframe ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2022 ). For regular bachelor's pro -  grams, the minimum time requirement is six semesters ( Assefa   &  Sedgwick, 2004 ). Using the   “ European Credit Transfer and Accumula -  tion System ”   (ECTS) as a base for student workload, the indicator  “ student activity ”   was introduced for the funding of public universities ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2018 ). One credit is the equivalent of 25 real time student working hours (European  Union, 2015 ). This indicator is defined as students crossing a threshold of 16 +   ECTS credits in an academic year being labelled   “ active ”   ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2018, 2022 ). Due to being an   official   performance   indicator,   statistics   are   publicly   available ( Federal   Ministry   of   Education,   Science   and   Research,   2024b ). Following   the   “ International   Standard   Classification   of   Education ”  (ISCED) category 0313 Psychology, there were 5263 enrolled bachelor's programs in psychology over all Austrian public universities at the end of the winter semester 2022/23 (February 2023), of which 4217 pro -  grams (80 %) were active at the end of the academic year 2022/23 ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2024b ). This implies that around 20 % of bachelor's psychology students did not reach this performance threshold. Official statistics on dropouts do not exist. Research is needed on psychology admission exam rankings of students and their later performance and outcomes (graduation or dropout), to come to a conclusion whether their performance is random or systematic, leading to recommendations for or against the increase of places.  1.3.   Aims and expectations  Due to the unique specifications of the Austrian university system in general and in line with possible changes due to the introduction of the new psychotherapy law ( Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research, 2024a ), previous research from other university systems alone allows no conclusions about an adjustment of the number of places for students in psychology bachelor's programs. Research on large datasets of admission exams in psychology is warranted, paying attention to correlations between the admission ranks of students and their later performance outcomes. On the one hand, there may be no correlations. This would mean that inactive students and dropouts occur unsystem -  atically and at a random rate in every student cohort. In this case, increasing the number of places for new students should not change the overall percentage of inactive students and dropouts. On the other hand, significant and strong correlations between those variables could hint that the frequency of dropouts and inactive students is systematic; with increasing strength of the effects. If this is the case, it means that the current number of   places for   students is   has already   reached the threshold of   “ good students “ , i.e., those who manage to study actively and graduate. Then, inactive students and dropouts in the data are primarily those with lower ranks. By increasing the number of places, the percentage of inactive students and dropouts may also increase. This  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  2

Page 8:
on rank 563. The observed ratio of 0.57 for rank 1 reaches 0.18 at rank 376 and 0.24 at rank 282.  A logistic regression model was calculated on the dataset of students, who were admitted to psychology but enrolled in a different program in the same semester. Outcome status was used as dependent measure and the ranking as predictor variable. The model showed no significant ef -  fect, Nagelkerke's   R 2   =   0.01,   b   =   0.003, odds   =   1.003,   p   =   .257, Wald statistic (1)   =   1.28,   CI   =   1.00 – 1.01. The numbers in the ranking of the admission exam of the bachelor's program psychology are not associated with dropping out or graduating in a different program. Another model on psychology students revealed significant influences, using all per -  formance indicators as predictors, Nagelkerke's   R 2   =   0.97,   b   =     1.24 ,   p  <   .001, Wald statistic (1)   =   340.77. The model parameters are listed in  Appendix E . The age at the end of a program, the age at enrollment, the overall study duration, the mean number of exams and the number of passed exams explain variance of the model.  A logistic regression model with outcome status as dependent mea -  sure and the number of admission attempts as predictor variable showed no significant effect, Nagelkerke's   R 2   <   0.001,   b   =     0.04, odds   =   0.96,   p  =   .767, Wald statistic (1)   =   0.09,   CI   =   0.74 – 1.25. The number of at -  tempts on the admission exam cannot explain variance of the outcome status.  A one-factorial ANOVA showed no significant differences in the ranking dependent on the type of students,   F (1,1598)   =   0.90,   p   =   .342,  η p 2   =   0.001. Psychology students and students who enroll in a different program do not differ in their mean rankings.  3.3.   Sociodemographic and -economic dimensions  Multiple ANOVA models have been calculated, using the ranking as dependent variable. The outcome status was one of two independent variables, except for a single one-factorial model only testing this vari -  able. The second independent variable was varied in each of the other models   and   the   following   variables have   been   included:   mobility, gender, school type, university degree of parents, migration status and nationality.  A two-factorial ANOVA with ranking as dependent variable and outcome status and mobility as independent variables showed no sig -  nificant main effect outcome status,   F (1, 1318)   =   0.46,   p   =   .497,   η p 2   <  0.001, a significant main effect mobility,   F (1, 1318)   =   6.71,   p   =   .010,   η p 2  =   0.01, and no significant interaction effect,   F (1, 1318)   =   6.71,   p   =   .130,  η p 2   =   0.002. Students who take a semester abroad had a lower (better) ranking in the admission exam ( M   =   93.34,   SD   =   71.13) compared to those, who do not ( M   =   117.92,   SD   =   65.83).  A two-factorial ANOVA with ranking as dependent variable and outcome status and gender as independent variables showed a signifi -  cant main effect outcome status,   F (1, 1319)   =   11.44,   p   <   .001,   η p 2   =   0.01, a significant main effect gender,   F (1, 1219)   =   3.34,   p   =   .038,   η p 2   =   0.003, and no significant interaction effect,   F (1, 1319)   =   1.36,   p   =   .244,   η p 2   =  0.001. Students who graduate had a lower (better) ranking in the admission exam ( M   =   113.16,   SD   =   66.67) compared to those, who drop out ( M   =   124.72,   SD   =   65.69). Men have a lower (better) ranking in the admission exam ( M   =   110.19,   SD   =   67.13) compared women ( M   =  118.87,   SD   =   66.18).  A two-factorial ANOVA with ranking as dependent variable and outcome status and school type as independent variables showed a significant main effect outcome status,   F (1, 1287)   =   8.84,   p   =   .003,   η p 2   =  0.01, a significant main effect school type,   F (1, 1287)   =   2.33,   p   =   .030,  η p 2   =   0.01, and no significant interaction effect,   F (1 ,   1287)   =   0.71,   p   =  .641,   η p 2   =   0.003. Students who graduate had a lower (better) ranking in the admission exam (113.26,   SD   =   66.65) compared to those, who drop out ( M   =   124.92,   SD   =   65.94). Post-hoc tests with Bonferroni correction showed no differences in the rankings dependent on school type.  Fig. 4.   The spread of the ranks per outcome status, showing the median, the middle quartiles (Q2, Q3) and the overall range of the rankings .  Table 3  Extrapolation of the ranks to estimate the odds ratio to drop out, the graduation ratio and probability to graduate.  Rank number  Drop out odds ratio compared to rank 1  Estimated graduation ratio  Probability to graduate  1   1.00   0.75   0.500  10   1.03   0.73   0.489  100   1.35   0.56   0.396  230   1.99   0.38   0.274  300   2.45   0.31   0.219  376   3.08   0.24   0.169  470   4.08   0.18   0.120  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  8

Page 5:
•   duration: overall study duration in semesters until the outcome (graduate or dropout). The minimum required time to finish is six semesters.   However,   students   can   take   psychology   courses   and exams being enrolled in other programs, transferring the results to the psychology bachelor's program once enrolled, facilitating time to graduation.  •   n   admission attempts: the number of attempts on the admission exam after the first one.  •   M   ECTS: mean ECTS credits per semester.  •   n   not passed exams: sum of failed exams over the course of the study duration.  •   n   passed exams: sum of passed exams over the course of the study duration.  •   n   exams: mean number of exams taken per semester.  •   M   grades: grade point average over the course of the study duration with 1 being the best grade and 5 the worst; grades 1 to 4 mean passing an exam, 5 means not passed.  •   n   courses: number of courses taken over the course of the study duration.  Comparing psychology students and those with a valid admission to psychology but an enrollment in other programs, descriptive differences can be found in some of the variables (e.g., M ECTS,   n   exams,   n   courses, duration), while others are similar to each other (e.g.,   M   grades, age). As shown in   Appendix C , the number of dropouts is higher in the group of non-psychology students, which explains these differences.  2.4.   Apparatus  Administrative data was queried from an Oracle ®   SQL database, admission   data   from   another   internal   data   storing   platform.   Data merging, data curation, visualization, correlation and linear regression analyses were conducted using R ( R Core Team, 2022 ) and ggplot2 ( Wickham et al., 2023 ). Queries were accomplished with the RODBC package ( Ripley   &   Lapsley, 2022 ), using the Oracle InstantClient19 ® . Logistic regression analyses and ANOVA models were performed in IBM SPSS ®   version 29.  2.5.   Transparency and openness  Due to sensitiveness and being a large size dataset of internal uni -  versity administrative data, it cannot be made available. The study has not been preregistered.  2.6.   Statistical analyses  Multiple linear Pearson correlations were done for the ranking in the admission exam and performance parameters. Case deletion was per -  formed on missing values. Missing values could appear on students without exams, which could be the case for dropouts. Their exam count is set to zero, but there are no grades that could be used in the dataset. Imputation methods were not meaningful for these cases, as this would skew the real data. In total, 51 cases with status   “ dropout ”   were removed due to missing grades, in the according analyses that uses the variable   M  grades. Administrative university data such as age or duration was complete for all students. Due to obvious outliers, rows with values below or above twice the   SD   of the mean over all cohorts were excluded. Two scatterplot matrices were created dependent on the outcome status (graduation, dropout), showing each of the correlations. The outcome status was separated, because differences in the performance metrics were expected, e.g., duration for graduates and dropouts would differ. Color coding was used to display the individual cohorts. Linear regres -  sion models were calculated for each variable constellation to depict the slopes of the regression lines as a visual orientation measure, including a 95 % confidence interval color coded with transparent grey. The same analyses were repeated on the dataset of students, who were admitted to psychology but enrolled in a different program in the same semester ( n  =   277). The plots are included in   Appendix D .  A box plot has been created to depict the spread of the ranks per outcome status. It serves the purpose of visualizing the difference in the outcome   status that is central   for the following   analyses. Logistic regression models were calculated with the outcome of graduation (0) and dropout (1) to check for the long-term stability of the rankings. Two models used the ranking as predictor. One used the dataset of psychol -  ogy students as sample, the other the dataset of students, who were admitted to psychology but enrolled in a different program in the same semester ( n   =   277). The results are used to estimate the number of students that could be admitted before reaching the prevalent dropout ratio of the university via extrapolation. Decay curves are visualized. In addition, the first model on the psychology students was calculated again, using all performance indicators as predictors. A fourth logistic regression model was calculated using the number of previous attempts in the admission exam as predictor. The number of maximum iterations in all models was set to 999. The directionality (positive / negative) of the predictors in a logistic regression model is represented by the alge -  braic sign of the coefficient   b . This is defined as the change in the log- odds of a variable, which can be transformed into the odds ratio. While keeping all other variables constant, the odds ratio represents the odds of an event occurring in the observed variable. For instance, an odds ratio with a value of 2 corresponds with twice the odds of gradu -  ating when one rank is changed. A one-factorial ANOVA was calculated with the dataset (psychology students, other students) as independent variable and the ranking as outcome.  Multiple two-factorial ANOVA models were calculated using the ranking as dependent variable and the outcome status as the first in -  dependent measure. The second independent measure was varied be -  tween the socioeconomic and sociodemographic categorial variables. Post-hoc   tests   were   performed   using   Bonferroni   correction.   The  Table 2  Descriptive statistics for predictor variables of the statistical analyses .  Enrollment   Variable   Min   Max   M   SD   SE  Psychology   Ranking   1   230   116.06   66.59   1.83  Age university entrance  17.00   38.67   19.04   1.57   0.04  Age enrollment  17.87   59.75   21.17   3.33   0.09  Age end   18.43   63.19   23.97   3.53   0.10  Duration   0   18.00   5.85   2.48   0.01  n   admission attempts  0   3   0.19   0.48   0.01  M   ECTS   0.00   66.00   23.97   9.00   0.25  n   not passed exams  0   29   3.51   4.17   0.12  n   passed exams  0   77   43.27   20.08   0.55  M   exams   0.00   14.60   6.45   2.82   0.08  M   grades   1.00   5.00   2.45   0.74   0.02  n   courses   0   19   6.99   2.98   0.82  variable   Min   Max   M   SD   SE  Other programs ( n   =   277)  Ranking   2   229   120.25   67.17   4.04  Age university entrance  17.65   34.92   19.02   1.52   0.09  Age enrollment  17.87   40.17   20.19   2.40   0.14  Age end   18.01   42.37   21.52   3.05   0.18  Duration   0   17   2.16   4.06   0.24  n   admission attempts  0   0   0.00   0.00   0.00  M   ECTS   0.00   38.43   12.21   10.52   1.01  n   not passed exams  0   33   0.68   2.90   0.17  n   passed exams  0   103   8.32   19.15   1.15  M   exams   0   12.88   1.07   2.22   0.13  M   grades   1   5   2.52   1.08   0.11  n   courses   0   13   1.31   2.65   0.16  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  5

Page 16:
( continued   )  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  169   2   0   2   1.00  170   2   1   3   0.67  171   3   2   5   0.60  172   6   0   6   1.00  173   3   2   5   0.60  174   5   1   6   0.83  175   4   2   6   0.67  176   5   0   5   1.00  177   3   2   5   0.60  178   3   3   6   0.50  179   6   1   7   0.86  180   3   3   6   0.50  181   5   2   7   0.71  182   7   0   7   1.00  183   3   4   7   0.43  184   3   2   5   0.60  185   5   1   6   0.83  186   3   3   6   0.50  187   6   0   6   1.00  188   4   0   4   1.00  189   3   1   4   0.75  190   3   2   5   0.60  191   3   1   4   0.75  192   4   1   5   0.80  193   6   0   6   1.00  194   4   2   6   0.67  195   6   2   8   0.75  196   3   2   5   0.60  197   4   0   4   1.00  198   2   2   4   0.50  199   7   0   7   1.00  200   5   0   5   1.00  201   2   5   7   0.29  202   3   4   7   0.43  203   5   2   7   0.71  204   5   1   6   0.83  205   4   4   8   0.50  206   6   1   7   0.86  207   3   2   5   0.60  208   6   1   7   0.86  209   4   3   7   0.57  210   4   1   5   0.80  211   4   1   5   0.80  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  212   4   3   7   0.57  213   4   4   8   0.50  214   3   3   6   0.50  215   6   0   6   1.00  216   5   2   7   0.71  217   3   4   7   0.43  218   2   1   3   0.67  219   5   2   7   0.71  220   5   1   6   0.83  221   5   4   9   0.56  222   2   1   3   0.67  223   8   0   8   1.00  224   3   2   5   0.60  225   4   3   7   0.57  226   6   0   6   1.00  227   2   3   5   0.40  228   3   3   6   0.50  229   5   0   5   1.00  230   2   2   4   0.50  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  16

Page 20:
psychology students in higher education.   Personality and Individual Differences, 29 (6), 10 .  Cantwell, R., Archer, J., & Bourke, S. (2001). A comparison of the academic experiences and achievement of university students entering by traditional and non-traditional means.   Assessment   &   Evaluation in Higher Education, 26 (3), 221 – 234 .  Coker, J. S., Heiser, E., & Taylor, L. (2018). Student outcomes associated with short-term and semester study abroad programs.   Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 30 (2), 92 – 105 .  Cozzarelli, C., & Major, B. (1990). Exploring the validity of the impostor phenomenon.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 9 (4), 401 – 417 .  Díaz Mújica, A. E., P  ́ erez Villalobos, M. V., Bernardo Guti  ́ errez, A. B., Cervero Fern  ́ andez- Casta  ̃ n  ́ on, A., & Gonz  ́ alez García, J. A. (2019). Affective and cognitive variables involved in structural prediction of university dropout.   Psicothema, 4 , 429 – 436 .  DIN. (2016).   DIN 33430: Requirements for proficiency assessment procedures and their implementation . Berlin: Beuth .  Donovan, J. J., Dwight, S. A., & Schneider, D. (2014). The impact of applicant faking on selection measures, hiring decisions, and employee performance.   Journal of Business and Psychology, 29 , 479 – 493 .  Eller, N., & Stumm, G. (2024).   Psychotherapieausbildung in    ̈ Osterreich . Heidelberg, Germany: Springer .  European Union. (2015).   European credit transfer system: ECTS Users ’   guide 2015 . Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union .  Fabito, B. S., Rodriguez, R. L., & Catacutan-Bangit, A. E. (2015).   Correlation between student entrance exam results and academic performance: Case of a College in a Philippine University   (pp. 50 – 60). National University   –   Education that works .  Faj ˇ cíkov  ́ a, A., & Urbancov  ́ a, H. (2019). Factors influencing students ’   motivation to seek higher education — A case study at a State University in the Czech Republic.  Sustainability, 11 (17), 4699 .  Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research. (2018).   Federal act on the capacity orientated, student-centered financing of universities . Universities: Financing Act - UniFinV .  Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research. (2021a).   Performance agreement 2022 – 24 University of Vienna . Vienna, Austria: Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research .  Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research. (2021b).   Performance agreement 2022 – 24 University of Graz . Vienna, Austria: Performance Agreement 2022 – 24 University of Graz .  Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research. (2022). Federal Act on the Organisation of Universities and their Studies (Universities Act 2002   –   UG).  Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research. (2024a).   Federal act on psychotherapy 2024 - PthG 2024 . Vienna, Austria: Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research .  Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research. (2024b). Datawarehouse of the Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research. Retrieved from   unidata.gv.at .  Galla, B. M., Shulman, E. P., Plummer, B. D., Gardner, M., Hutt, S. J., Goyer, J. P., & Duckworth, A. L. (2019). Why high school grades are better predictors of on-time college graduation than are admissions test scores: The roles of self-regulation and cognitive ability.   American Educational Research Journal, 56 (6), 2077 – 2115 .  Germeijs, V., & Verschueren, K. (2011). Indecisiveness: Specificity and predictive validity.   European Journal of Personality, 25 (5), 295 – 305 .  Harton, H. C., & Lyons, P. C. (2003). Gender, empathy, and the choice of the psychology major.   Teaching of Psychology, 30 (1), 19 – 24 .  International Organization for Standardization [ISO]. (2011).   Assessment service delivery — Procedures and methods to assess people in work and organizational settings — Part 2: Requirements for service providers . Geneva: International Organization for Standardization [ISO] .  Ishitani, T. (2006). Studying attrition and degree completion behavior among first- generation college students in the United States.   The Journal of Higher Education, 77  (5), 861 – 885 .  Ishitani, T. T., & Snider, K. G. (2006). Longitudinal effects of college preparation programs on college retention.   IR Applications, 9 , ED504377 .  Jones-White, D. R., Radcliffe, P. M., Huesman, R. L., & Kellogg, J. P. (2010). Redefining student success: Applying different multinomial regression techniques for the study of student graduation across institutions of higher education.   Research in Higher Education, 51 (2), 151 – 174 .  Jurajda, S.,   &   Munich, D. (2008). Gender Gap in Admission Performance under Competitive Pressure. CERGE-EI Working Paper Series,   (371)., 371 , pp. 1 – 20.  Karlsson, L.,   &   Wikstr  ̈ om, M. (2021). Gender differences in admission scores and first- year university achievement. Retrieved from Department of Economics, Umeå University:   http://www.usbe.umu.se/ues/ues1001.pdf .  Kasworm, C. E., & Pike, G. R. (1994). Adult undergraduate students: Evaluating the appropriateness of a traditional model of academic performance.   Research in Higher Education, 35 , 689 – 710 .  Kraft, H. G., Lamina, C., Kluckner, T., Wild, C., & Prodinger, W. M. (2013). Paradise lost or paradise regained? Changes in admission system affect academic performance and drop-out rates of medical students.   Medical Teacher, 35 (5), e1123 – e1129 .  Kumar, S., & Jagacinski, C. M. (2006). Imposters have goals too: The imposter phenomenon and its relationship to achievement goal theory.   Personality and Individual Differences, 40 (1), 147 – 157 .  Kuncel, N. R., Cred  ́ e, M., Thomas, L. L., Klieger, D. M., Seiler, S. N., & Woo, S. E. (2005). A meta-analysis of the validity of the pharmacy college admission test (PCAT) and grade predictors of pharmacy student performance.   American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 69 (3), 51 .  Kuncel, N. R., Hezlett, S. A., & Ones, D. S. (2001). A comprehensive meta-analysis of the predictive validity of the graduate record examinations: Implications for graduate student selection and performance.   Psychological Bulletin, 127 , 162 – 181 .  Kwon, J. (2015).   The correlation between standardized test scores of entering freshmen and their final grade point average upon graduation (doctoral dissertation, Northwest Missouri state university) . Missouri: Northwest Missouri State University .  Leiser, M. S., & Wolter, S. C. (2015). Reducing university dropout rates with entrance tests – self-fulfilling prophecy or high quality students.   Working Paper, No. 108 . Retrieved from   http://repec.business.uzh.ch/RePEc/iso/leadinghouse/0108_lhwpap er.pdf .  Lemmens, J. C., Du Plessis, G. I., & Maree, D. J. (2011). Measuring readiness and success at a higher education institution.   Journal of Psychology in Africa, 21 (4), 615 – 621 .  Loder, A. K. (2024). Student flow visualization. European Journal of Education ,   0(0), p. e12619.  Luna, Y. M., & Winters, S. A. (2017).   “ Why did you blend my learning? ”   a comparison of student success in lecture and blended learning introduction to sociology courses.  Teaching Sociology, 45 (2), 116 – 130 .  National Assembly of Austria. (2019).   Federal act on the use of the title   “ psychologist ”   and on the practice of Health Psychology and clinical psychology (psychologists act 2013) . Vienna: National Assembly of Austria .  Neubauer, A., Korunka, C.,   &   Laireiter, A. R. (2020). Psychologie in    ̈ Osterreich. Psychologische Rundschau ,   71(4), pp. https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.102 6/0033-3042/a000503 .  Nieuwoudt, J. E., & Pedler, M. L. (2023). Student retention in higher education: Why students choose to remain at university.   Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory   &   Practice, 25 (2), 326 – 349 .  Nikolaenko, A. D., Lantratova, A. A., & Volkodav, T. V. (2018). Choosing psychology as a career: Study on Students ’   professional motivation.   Фо руМ М о л о д ых ученых , 5-1 (21), 35 – 41 .  O ’ Neill, L., Hartvigsen, J., Wallstedt, B., Korsholm, L., & Eika, B. (2011). Medical school dropout-testing at admission versus selection by highest grades as predictors.  Medical Education, 45 (11), 1111 – 1120 .  Pekkarinen, T. (2015). Gender differences in behaviour under competitive pressure: Evidence on omission patterns in university entrance examinations.   Journal of Economic Behavior   &   Organization, 115 , 94 – 110 .  Pol  ́ a ˇ ckov  ́ a, J., & Svato ˇ sov  ́ a, L. (2013). Relationship of success in university study and admission exam results.   Journal on Efficiency and Responsibility in Education and Science, 6 (4), 281 – 293 .  Price, J., & Dunne, M. (1990). Academic performance of students admitted after repeating entrance examinations to medical school.   Medical Education, 24 (3), 212 – 218 .  R Core Team. (2022).   R: A language an environment for statistical computing . Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing .  Ramli, A., Zain, R. M., Campus, C., Chepa, P., & Bharu, K. (2018). The impact of facilities on students ’   academic achievement.   Science International (Lahore), 30 (2), 299 – 311 .  Ripley, B., & Lapsley, M. (2022). RODBC.   ODBC database access .   R package version, 1 , 3 – 20 .  Rokach, A., & Boulazreg, S. (2020). The road to becoming a psychologist: Indicators of success and hardship during the university years.   The Journal of Psychology, 154 (8), 632 – 661 .  Sackett, P. R., Kuncel, N. R., Arneson, J. J., Cooper, S. R., & Waters, S. D. (2009). Does socioeconomic status explain the relationship between admissions tests and post- secondary academic performance?   Psychological Bulletin, 135 (1), 1 .  S  ́ andor, A. V. (2020). Motivations and self-perceived career prospects of undergraduate sociology students.   European Journal of Social Science Education and Research, 7 (3), 1 – 7 .  Stumpf, H., & Stanley, J. C. (2002). Group data on high school grade point averages and scores on academic aptitude tests as predictors of institutional graduation rates.  Educational and Psychological Measurement, 62 (6), 1042 – 1052 .  Sulphey, M. M., Al-Kahtani, N. S., & Syed, A. M. (2018). Relationship between admission grades and academic achievement.   Entrepreneurship and Sustainability Issues, 5 (3), 648 – 658 .  Tesema, M. T. (2014).   The validity of university entrance examination and high school grade point average for predictiong first year university students ’   academic performance . Netherlands, Twente: University of Twente .  Tippins, N. T., Sackett, P., & Oswald, F. L. (2018). Principles for the validation and use of personnel selection procedures.   Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 11 , 1 – 97 .  University of Graz. (2023).   Intellectual Capital Report 2022 . Graz, Austria: University of Graz .  University of Vienna. (2020).   Intellectual Capital Report 2019 . Vienna, Austria: University of Vienna .  University of Vienna. (2023).   Intellectual Capital Report 2022 . Vienna, Austria: University of Vienna .  Upmane, A., Gaitniece-Put  ̄ ane, A., &   ˇ Smitin  ̧ a, A. (2016). Society. Integration. Education.  Proceedings of the International Scientific Conference, 1 , 540 – 552 .  Verostek, M., Miller, C. W., & Zwickl, B. (2021). Analyzing admissions metrics as predictors of graduate GPA and whether graduate GPA mediates Ph. D. Completion.  Physical review .   Physics Education Research, 17 (2), Article 020115 .  Viswesvaran, C., & Ones, D. S. (1999). Meta-analyses of fakability estimates: Implications for personality measurement.   Educational and Psychological Measurement, 59 , 197 – 210 .  Watrin, L., Geiger, M., Levacher, J., Spinath, B., & Wilhelm, O. (2022). Development and initial validation of an admission test for bachelor psychology studies.   Frontiers in Education, 7 , Article 909818 .  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  20

Page 13:
Appendix A.   Descriptive statistics for the separate parts of the admission exam scores and the final ranking per cohort, where data was available  Part   Cohort   Min   Max   M   SD   SE  Knowledge   13 W  14 W   13   56   39.39   8.02   0.61  15 W   14   57   38.16   8.35   0.61  16 W   11   56   37.51   8.58   0.63  17 W   15   50   31.42   6.96   0.51  18 W   11   49   32.94   8.04   0.61  19 W   13   51   31.42   7.46   0.59  20 W   8   27   18.86   3.66   0.30  21 W   7   28   18.71   4.26   0.35  22 W   7   27   18.13   4.34   0.34  23 W   5   29   20.65   4.37   0.34  Logic   13 W  14 W   1   17   9.94   3.07   0.24  15 W   2   30   17.74   5.63   0.41  16 W   0   40   20.55   6.98   0.51  17 W   6   30   18.34   5.3   0.39  18 W   2   28   15.58   5.37   0.41  19 W   2   30   16.51   5.64   0.44  20 W   3   15   9.11   2.74   0.23  21 W   2   14   8.99   2.57   0.21  22 W   2   14   8.14   2.64   0.21  23 W   1   15   8.63   2.95   0.23  English   13 W  14 W   2   15   9.72   2.53   0.19  15 W   0   40   21.29   7.27   0.53  16 W   5   40   22.81   7.47   0.55  17 W   0   28   17.08   5.55   0.41  18 W   6   30   19.77   4.46   0.34  19 W   0   26   15.85   5.58   0.44  20 W   1   15   9.33   2.96   0.25  21 W   1   14   10.72   2.00   0.16  22 W   2   15   8.96   2.55   0.20  23 W   3   15   10.93   2.36   0.18  Appendix B.   Absolute and relative frequencies of graduates and dropouts per rank over all cohorts  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  1   4   3   7   0.57  2   5   0   5   1.00  3   4   0   4   1.00  4   5   0   5   1.00  5   7   0   7   1.00  6   5   2   7   0.71  7   5   0   5   1.00  8   6   0   6   1.00  9   7   0   7   1.00  10   4   2   6   0.67  11   4   1   5   0.80  12   4   0   4   1.00  13   4   0   4   1.00  14   3   3   6   0.50  15   7   2   9   0.78  16   6   1   7   0.86  17   1   1   2   0.50  18   5   2   7   0.71  19   3   0   3   1.00  20   3   1   4   0.75  21   4   0   4   1.00  22   4   0   4   1.00  23   7   0   7   1.00  24   6   1   7   0.86  25   3   3   6   0.50  26   5   2   7   0.71  27   2   4   6   0.33  28   4   1   5   0.80  29   3   3   6   0.50  30   4   2   6   0.67  31   7   0   7   1.00  32   6   0   6   1.00  ( continued on next page )  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  13

Page 14:
( continued   )  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  33   4   2   6   0.67  34   4   1   5   0.80  35   4   3   7   0.57  36   5   4   9   0.56  37   5   2   7   0.71  38   6   0   6   1.00  39   7   1   8   0.88  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  40   5   0   5   1.00  41   3   0   3   1.00  42   4   1   5   0.80  43   1   1   2   0.50  44   7   1   8   0.88  45   4   1   5   0.80  46   4   0   4   1.00  47   5   1   6   0.83  48   8   0   8   1.00  49   4   2   6   0.67  50   3   1   4   0.75  51   4   0   4   1.00  52   4   2   6   0.67  53   6   1   7   0.86  54   5   1   6   0.83  55   3   2   5   0.60  56   4   2   6   0.67  57   7   0   7   1.00  58   1   0   1   1.00  59   6   0   6   1.00  60   2   0   2   1.00  61   5   2   7   0.71  62   5   2   7   0.71  63   4   1   5   0.80  64   2   2   4   0.50  65   2   3   5   0.40  66   5   3   8   0.63  67   5   0   5   1.00  68   2   2   4   0.50  69   7   2   9   0.78  70   5   2   7   0.71  71   4   3   7   0.57  72   4   4   8   0.50  73   7   1   8   0.88  74   4   2   6   0.67  75   4   4   8   0.50  76   4   3   7   0.57  77   7   1   8   0.88  78   3   2   5   0.60  79   6   0   6   1.00  80   5   2   7   0.71  81   2   0   2   1.00  82   8   0   8   1.00  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  83   2   1   3   0.67  84   4   1   5   0.80  85   5   1   6   0.83  86   4   2   6   0.67  87   3   1   4   0.75  88   5   1   6   0.83  89   5   0   5   1.00  90   2   1   3   0.67  91   2   3   5   0.40  92   4   3   7   0.57  93   4   1   5   0.80  94   4   1   5   0.80  95   1   0   1   1.00  96   4   3   7   0.57  97   3   1   4   0.75  98   7   2   9   0.78  99   5   0   5   1.00  100   4   2   6   0.67  ( continued on next page )  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  14

Page 15:
( continued   )  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  101   5   1   6   0.83  102   3   4   7   0.43  103   5   2   7   0.71  104   4   1   5   0.80  105   5   2   7   0.71  106   4   2   6   0.67  107   6   1   7   0.86  108   4   3   7   0.57  109   7   1   8   0.88  110   6   0   6   1.00  111   5   2   7   0.71  112   4   3   7   0.57  113   4   2   6   0.67  114   2   2   4   0.50  115   4   0   4   1.00  116   2   0   2   1.00  117   7   0   7   1.00  118   5   1   6   0.83  119   3   2   5   0.60  120   5   2   7   0.71  121   6   1   7   0.86  122   6   1   7   0.86  123   4   3   7   0.57  124   4   2   6   0.67  125   5   0   5   1.00  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  126   4   0   4   1.00  127   1   3   4   0.25  128   9   0   9   1.00  129   6   2   8   0.75  130   4   0   4   1.00  131   3   3   6   0.50  132   3   2   5   0.60  133   4   2   6   0.67  134   4   1   5   0.80  135   4   1   5   0.80  136   6   0   6   1.00  137   3   3   6   0.50  138   4   3   7   0.57  139   2   2   4   0.50  140   2   2   4   0.50  141   7   0   7   1.00  142   4   1   5   0.80  143   2   3   5   0.40  144   8   0   8   1.00  145   1   2   3   0.33  146   3   1   4   0.75  147   2   2   4   0.50  148   7   0   7   1.00  149   5   0   5   1.00  150   5   1   6   0.83  151   7   1   8   0.88  152   2   4   6   0.33  153   6   0   6   1.00  154   5   1   6   0.83  155   4   2   6   0.67  156   4   3   7   0.57  157   4   2   6   0.67  158   3   0   3   1.00  159   4   0   4   1.00  160   7   2   9   0.78  161   4   0   4   1.00  162   4   3   7   0.57  163   6   1   7   0.86  164   2   2   4   0.50  165   4   1   5   0.80  166   1   3   4   0.25  167   8   0   8   1.00  168   4   2   6   0.67  Rank   n graduation   n   dropout   Total   % graduation  ( continued on next page )  A.K.F. Loder   Acta   Psychologica   250   (2024)   104523  15

