Page 2:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  270  i nternational students an important source of revenue for the prospective host country  (Alfattal   2017 ; USADC 2016). This monetary colouring of international studies calls for  a comprehensive understanding of what marketing information and how private colleg es  stimulate international students’ expectations in order to eliminate any future college  dropout intentions. Important operating variables such as the international academic  reputation   of   a   bachelor’s   degree,   the   way   private   colleges   stimulate   and   raise  international students’ expectations for the sake of competitiveness, and the possibility  that international students over time have developed personal agendas and unrealistic  expectations from the host country and colleges call for investigation as they m ay have  become   an   early   and   silent   student   dropout   indicator.   Recent   studies   examined  comprehensively the post - purchase experience and satisfaction level of   i nternational  students in relation to their expectations from hospitality and tourism management -  re lated studies, or other auxiliary elements such as summer internships, career choices  or potentials (Ezeuduji et al. 2017; Farmaki 2016; Kim and Park 2013; Lee and Chao  2013;   Robi n son,   Ruhanen and Breakey   2015 ; Zopiatis and Theocharous 2013 ; Alonso -  Almeida   et al.   2015 ).  However, a major lack in literature has been observed concerning what information and  how pre - purchase expectations of   i nternational   students are stimulated by small private  colleges (Alfattal 2017; Bohman 2014; Borghi, Mainardes and Silva 2017; Jillapalli and  Jillapalli 2014). The studies of Alfattal (2017) and East (2013) support that at an  operational level an in - depth knowledge of   the marketing and promotional information  that influences   i nternational   students to select a college is critical. Such awareness could  assist in capitalizing on factors that drive student satisfaction as well as in countermining  those factors widening the   gap between expectations and the experienced reality during  studies. The study of what marketing and promotional information affects and shapes  i nternational   students’ expectations falls within the marketing research and calls for a  scientific market resea rch inquiry (Alfattal 2017; Saiti, Papa and Brown 2017; Kotler  and Keller 2015 ; Ahmad , 2015 ). The current research inquiry extends the literature in  enhancing understanding of how marketing and promotional information used by  colleges stimulates   i nternatio nal   students’ expectations in selecting a hospitality and  tourism management program and to study in private colleges in Cyprus. For this  purpose, the Qualtrics marketing research concept was adapted, as it allows a market  researcher to collect data from c onsumers concerning their expectations from a product  or a service prior to actual purchase (Smith 2018). The Qualtrics market research concept  builds on exploring seven elements: consumers’ Explicit and Implicit Expectations,  Static and Dynamic Performanc e Expectations, and Technological, Interpersonal and  Situational Expectations.   Following, this research paper is structured as follow. First, a  review of the literature on international students’ expectations sets the baseline upon  which the conceptual fra mework was summarized. Then, a comprehensive explanation  of the employed research methods is presented, followed by a thorough analysis and  discussion of the findings. Last, study limitations and the future orientation of the study  is presented.

Page 3:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  271  1.   LIT ERATURE REVIEW  1.1.   Static Performance Expectations  Chen (2007), Chen and Zimitat (2006), and McMahon (1992) reveal that international  students’ expectations are highly affected by the reputation and the quality of the  educational system in the host country.   In many cases the serious weaknesses of the  educational system in the home country may force students to pursue their studies  abroad, and more specifically to countries with better economies and stronger reputation  in the particular fields of their studies   (Chen and Zimitat 2006). Pimpa (2005) specifies  that international students with a major drive to study abroad are highly influenced by  the educational system’s reputation, which is expressed through the quality criteria used  in selecting a particular pro gram choice. In such cases, the program choice is based on  the university’s international image, and popularity for its quality standards (Pimpa  2005) and the availability of scholarships are the most influential drivers in their choices  (McMahon 1992).  1.2.   I nterpersonal, Explicit and Implicit Expectations  However, particular attention should be paid to the suggestions of Su et al. (2016) who  clarify that international students’ expectations are expressed mainly through self -  definitional needs that reflect a   desire for further personal and professional pursuit or  growth. According to the findings of Borghi et al. (2016), Headar, Elaref and Yacout  (2013),   Parahoo, Harvey and Tamim (2013)   and Bonaldo and Pereira (2016) , self -  definitional needs are affected by va rious cultural, psychographic, behavioral and  demographic factors. In their findings, Borghi et al. (2016) support the argument that in  many cases international students’ expectations reflect personal ideas and subjective  views of what may happen upon regi stration in a program, predictions and personal  thoughts of how things should be during studies, or personal and peer knowledge and  experience from utilizing similar services. Consequently, the individual’s tacit cognition  influences   the   post - purchase   expe rience,   the   service   quality   perception   and   the  evaluation of a utilized educational service (Mainardes, Alves, and Raposo 2013). The  common understanding of   what   constitutes a   study abroad   along   with   students’  expectations from a program or service quality   may vary drastically according to the  students’ personal agendas, priorities and career aspirations (Anastasiou and Koumi  2018 ; Garbati and Rothschild 2016) .  Furthermore, the pivotal marketing and promotional messages used by private colleges  to highligh t specific benefits to be gained from hospitality and tourism studies in the host  country, in relation to a student’s personal agenda, may overshadow the actual purpose  of studying abroad. The acquisition of innovative academic and advanced professional  sk ills may become of secondary substance in the program’s promotion, turning out to be  too complicated to communicate the actual meaning of the purpose and the outcome from  studies abroad. This is happening due to the provision of insufficient, limited or we ll -  controlled information by the colleges as international students, most of the times, lack  relevant decision - making experience, mature judgment and good reflection regarding  future career prospects or expectations from studies abroad (Anastasiou and Koum is  2018). Beyond the official announcement and warranty of the program’s accreditation

Page 4:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  272  by DI.P.A.E. (2018), which can be found on its official website, no warranty exists about  the reliability of all other exchanged marketing or promotional information abo ut the  program’s quality, the various supportive services, the local living standards, or the  social and cultural acceptance and openness of the host country (Chen 2007).  1.3.   Dynamic Performance and Situational Expectations  Considering the influence and the   impact of the above factors, Dowe l l, Morrison and  Heffernan (2015) suggest that colleges should proactively work carefully on their  marketing and promotion message communication and tactics. The authors believe in a  productive outcome that results from   assisting International students to gain a realistic  and objective idea of student life in the host country; this can be achieved through the  provision of detailed, authenticated and reliable information about the program, the  supportive services and the l ocal lifestyle, prior to their application for and registration  in a program. This requires from colleges a non - opportunistic approach and to invest in  a long - run profitable relationship where marketing and promotional information will be  used as an effect ive induction training material as to what will follow during studies  ( Dowell, Morrison and Heffernan 2015;   Abratt and Kleyn 2012) . This cognitive  induction will assist International students to become aware and gain an objective  understanding; hence, the   first emotional and psychological bonds between International  students and the college will be formed ( Heffernan   et al. 2018).  Prugsamatz et al. (2006) underlines as an example the case of Asian students and the  importance they pay to an International su pport network in the host country when  selecting a program of study. Due to this, many colleges in order to attract Asian students  emphasize marketing and promotion - wise messages related to an international network  and to its effectiveness in the host coun try. However, Asian students may feel high levels  of dissatisfaction and frustration when they experience the gap between expectations and  reality and the absence of such a service, leading to poor academic response and high  dropout rates. Asian students’   dropout rates are becoming very threatening (Prugsamatz  et al. 2006), particularly for the small Cypriot educational industry where 90% of  international students come mainly from Asia and Africa (EMN 2012). High dropout  rates among international students h ave serious economic impact on private colleges and  the Cypriot economy in general.  This confirms the findings of Prugsamatz et al. (2006) who reveal Asia to be a main  student incubator for studies abroad. In their research, concerning service quality  pr omises used by universities and colleges, they emphasize the necessity to understand  international students’ behavior and their actual expectations from international studies.  Withdrawal and dropout intentions may lead private colleges to a serious academi c and  operational failure with a twofold implication. The first implication is related to the  unsuccessful completion of a bachelors’ degree, resulting in much lower graduation rates  for international students and an academic failure. The second implicatio n is related to  the college’s overall profitability and its inability to sustain the quality standards of the  provided services, which is the ultimate business goal.

Page 5:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  273  Prugsamatz et al. (2006) strongly acknowledge the lack of research in understanding how  service - related promises may affect international students studying abroad. Although  various thematic areas have been covered in the literature, such as the factors influencing  students’ program choice, students’ decision - making process and the availabili ty of  information channels as well as insights on international students’ expectations from  hospitality and tourism management - related studies are evolving. Literature has a  plethora of empirical studies that deal basically with International students’ pos t -  purchase experiences and various auxiliary elements (Ezeuduji et al. 2017; Farmaki  2016; Kim and Park 2013; Lee and Chao 2013; Prugsamatz et al. 2006;   Robinson,  Ruhanen and Breakey 2016; Zopiatis and Theocharous 2013). Also, extensive research  has been c onducted on factors and sources and completeness of information provided to  students (Anastasiou and Koumis 2018) as well as on cross - cultural values and well -  known educational brands (Prugsamatz et al. 2006). Hence, the majority of studies deal  basically   with the British, American, New Zealandia and Australian universities (EMN  2012).   Contrary   to   the   young   educational   industry,   the   aforementioned   global  educational centers are mature markets with educational institutions dating centuries of  sustainable dev elopment in the educational arena. The aim of this study is to extend the  body of literature on examining and mapping the marketing and promotional information  used by private collages to stimulate international students’ expectations and particularly  Inte rnational students at the pre - purchase stage, for hospitality and tourism management  studies in Cyprus.  2.   BACKGROUND / CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK  The conceptual framework (Figure 1) in the current study posits private colleges as  stimulating   i nternational   students’ expectations for hospitality and tourism management  studies in Cyprus, resulting in graduation or college dropout.   In the current study,  i nternational   students   are considered to be customers due to the economic transaction  involved, as students   buy via the exchange of money a particular educational service  from profit - aiming private colleges (Alfattal 2017; USADC 2016; Watjatrakul 2014;).  Accordingly, the student - as - a - customer approach dictates the necessity for an extensive  market research in or der to understand the marketing and promotional information that  stimulates   students’   expectations   at   the   pre - purchase   stage.   Such   information   is  encrypted in the marketing and promotional messages sent to prospective customers via  agents, social media or   the website, and it may impact the students’ satisfaction level in  the post - purchase experience (Smith 2018). Information used and exchanged at the pre -  purchase stage creates, consciously or not, expectations that affect students in various  and subjective   ways, leading to graduation or college dropout. For example, students  may use it for comparison or as a reference point in evaluating a private college’s  program   quality   and   supportive   service   responsiveness   compared   to   personal  expectations (Watjatrakul 2 014).

Page 7:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  275  the pre - purchase stage, from the hospitality and tourism management studies in Cypriot  colleges. Thus, college dropout high - risk expectations could be conceptualized and  contextualized, allowing college administrators to undertake corrective actions and  sustain academic success.  Table 1:   Study’s Adapted Definitions of the   Qualtrics’   Seven Types of Expectations  Type of  Expectation   Definition  Explicit  Expectations created by marketing - related information used by colleges in  order to promote and   communicate a particular message about the college,  such as programs of studies, provided services, lifestyle, student privileges,  etc.  Implicit  Expectations that potential international students have shaped, based on their  personal interpretation of the   marketing information they receive from  colleges.  Static  Performance  International students’ expectations addressing the relationship between  studying abroad performance and quality in terms of college ease of  accessibility, academic performance   responsiveness, educational supportive  services, on - campus college life, course scheduling, modern teaching, etc.  Dynamic  Performance  Expectations reflecting future developments/achievements evolving from the  benefits gained during international studies   –   e.g. career advancement,  networking, alumni support services, high future income, transferred to other  Western countries, etc.  Technological  / Technical  Expectations related to the implementation aspects of a program of study  such   as   technological   infr astructure   to   deliver   the   courses,   technical –  professional competencies and skills to be developed, studying skills, etc.  Situational  Possible factors influencing the latitude of expected performance versus the  expected satisfaction such as international   recognition/reputation of the  college, host country’s cultural openness, direct career relevance, etc.  Interpersonal  International   students’   expectations   that   represent   the   acquisition   of  professional skills, work in the industry, personal agendas and as pirations,  personal understanding of what studies abroad means, financial worries, etc.  3.   RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  The aim of this study was to explore marketing related information used by private  collages to stimulate   i nternational   students’ expectations at the pre - purchase stage, and,  thus, to determine any relation between   International   students’ expectations and college  dropout intentions. To do so, a sequential, mixed - methods approach was followed to  obtain a more meaningful, co mprehensive and balanced analysis of the collected data  (Berman 2017). Usually, this is used in management situations for problem - solving  testing and effective decision - making (Creswell 2013; Creswell and Plano Clark 2011;  Johnson and Onwuegbuzie 2004).

Page 8:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  276  3.1.   Phase one  Rooted in the heart of marketing research, an exploratory focus group case study was  organized to explore the   i nternational   students’ expectations from hospitality and tourism  higher education in Cyprus. Since the aim of the research was to co - create new  knowledge through the interaction between the researcher and the   i nternational   students,  the constructivist tradition infused the social learning interaction (Lincoln and Guba  2013). Using the themes emerging from the literature, the Qualtrics marketing research  conceptual framework set the baseline upon which a focus group discussi on guide was  prepared. The   focus group   guide was followed in order to introduce to all students the  seven elements of the concept and to initiate group discussion (Carey and Asbury 2016).  The seven main constructs were explored, and sub - topics were used in   probing further  ideas or discussion points, simultaneously supporting effective brainstorming (Silverman  2016). The aim was to generate information on collective views, and hence to discover  emerging meanings, lying behind participants’ views (Carey and A sbury 2016) about the  information responsible for stimulating students’ expectations. The aim was to discover  themes or patterns related to the seven categories that could be used at a later stage in the  questionnaire design.   For all three evaluation focus   group interviews, a convenience  sampling approach was used in selecting participants. In every focus group eight  newcomer   i nternational   students were selected, from all four districts and through local  student unions. The participants signed an informed c onsent form clarifying the purpose  and objectives of the study (Stage and Manning 2016) as well as how personal anonymity  and confidentiality would be secured (Carey and Asbury 2016). An mp4 voice recording  was used as the primary technique to record each   focus group discussion; thus,  notetaking helped at a later stage to pay particular attention to various details, enhancing  information transcription and interpretation reliability (Stage and Manning 2016).  Patterns and research variables, according to the   emerging codes and themes, were  categorized   and   displayed   under   the   appropriate   categories   of   the   questionnaire  (Silverman 2016).  3.2.   Phase two  3.2.1.   Hypothesis testing  In the current study, the importance of fulfilling   International   students’ expectations was  hypothesized in order to test the relationship between the students’ expectations and the  students’ dropout intentions. Subsequently, it could be determined if the effects of  fulfilling or not   International   students’ expectation s lead to severe consequences  regarding   International   students’ psychological stance and dropout intentions . T his  interrelationship is presented in a conceptual model in Figure 2. Seven hypotheses were  developed to test the findings and the impact of the Q ualtrics seven components in  shaping   International   students’ expectations at the pre - purchase stage:  •   H1: Explicit - based marketing information creates expectations with severe effect on  International   students’ dropout intentions  •   H2: Implicit - based marketing information creates expectations with severe effect on  International   students’ dropout intentions  •   H3: Static performance - based marketing information creates expectations with  severe effect on   International   students’ dropout int entions

Page 9:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  277  •   H4: Dynamic performance - related marketing information creates expectations with  severe effect on   International   students’ dropout intentions  •   H5: Technological - based marketing information creates expectations with severe  effect on   International   stude nts’ dropout intentions  •   H6: Interpersonal - based marketing information creates expectations with severe  effect on   International   students’ dropout intentions  •   H7: Situational - related marketing information creates expectations with severe effect  on   Internation al   students’ dropout intentions  3.3.   Data collection, processing, and analysis method  To test the above hypotheses, the survey method was used to collect the needed  information,   through   face - to - face   interviewer - administered   questionnaires.   The  questions were   developed according to the themes and concepts emerging from the  literature review and the analysis of the findings from the focus groups. Closed - ended  questions were included, and in assessing participants’ responses, a Likert - type scale  measurement metho d was used in order to compare two important research variables: the  importance of an expectation versus its consequence on dropout intentions. The  comparison of the two factors was made to help in determining high risk factors that  could lead to high drop out intentions. The importance variable (1 implies low importance  while 5 implies extremely important) represents the influence of a factor on an  International   student’s expectation when selecting a college for studies. The consequence  variable (1 implies low academic performance   while 5 implies college dropout)  represents the disappointment level and dropout intentions developed by an   International  student when   a gap between expectations and reality is experienced. The importance and  the consequence variables were used to create the   International   Students’ Expectation  Risk Assessment Matrix (ISERAM).  Figure 2:   Conceptual research model  H 4  College  Graduation  College  Dropout  Explicit Expectations  Implicit Expectations  Static Performance Expectations  Technological Expectations  Interpersonal Expectations  Situational Expectations  H1  H2  H 3  H 6  H 7  H 5  Dynamic Performance Expectations  International  Students’  Expectations from CY  Hospitality and  Tourism Higher  Education

Page 10:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  278  The Matrix was used t o define the level of dropout intentions by considering the category  of expectation importance against the category of disappointment consequence severity.  From a statistical perspective, the level of risk was calculated as the value of the  expectation imp ortance variable multiplied by the consequence severity on dropout  intentions. The findings from the survey helped in assessing the high risk expectations  and in mapping the roadway towards ISERAM. In doing so, a purposive sampling  approach was used to col lect data. The students were selected on the basis of being  newcomers, commencing studies at any private college in Cyprus for the first time, and  studying in a hospitality and tourism - related program. Prior to the commencement of the  research,   a   pilot   stu dy   was   performed   to   refine   the   questions   and   secure   the  questionnaires’ appropriateness, accuracy, reliability and validity (Yin 2017). The  content of the questionnaires was tested with 20 students in order to ensure that all  participants would face no pro blems in answering the questions and fulfilling the  objectives of the study. The pilot study revealed no significant issues and the official  questionnaire was produced.  After   the   questionnaire   design   process   and   the   pilot   study   was   completed,   the  questionnaires were handed out to   International   students during the academic year  2017/2018. The purposive sampling approach was followed to collect the needed data.  The survey w as distributed to the   International   students, studying in five districts of  Cyprus. Of the 450 questionnaires distributed, 373 were recovered. After discounting 49  incomplete or invalid copies, 324 were found to be consistent and valid, giving an  effective   recovery rate of 82.8%. Numerical codes were issued for all responses in order  to be used for computer analysis using EXCEL and SPSS software. The analysis of the  findings took place in two stages. In the first stage, the aim was to map the   International  students’ expectations through the ISERAM. This would afford an opportunity to  identify high risk expectations that are related to dropout intentions. Hence, in the second  stage a statistical analysis was conducted in order to test the hypotheses of the st udy.  4.   FINDINGS  4.1.   Demographics  Table 2 summarizes key findings of the respondents’ demographic and background.  From the final 324 respondents, there is a slight over - representation of the male  population at 61% (n=197) compared to 39% (n=127) of the female population. The  majority of the participants (69%; n=223) falls within the first two age groups of 18 – 23  and 2 4 – 29 years old. Only 51% (n=168) of the newcomers are high school graduates,  whereas 34% (n=111) of participants are bachelor’s or higher diploma graduates. The  findings showed as well that 76% (n= 246) of respondents have a family member (up to  a second - d egree relative) who studied or worked in Cyprus in the past. Concerning  participants’ families’ study levels, the majority of participants’ parents (55%) and first -  degree relatives (58%) seems to be high school graduates only. When it comes to the  parents’   professions, 24% of participants’ parents work for the local government, 22%  in the agriculture sector, and only 16% in the service sector with which the selected  program of study is actually related.

Page 12:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  280  studies. From this emerges the necessity for a good internship placement upon the  completion of the first academic year. This is evidenced by the high number of stu dent  responses (91%; n=296) indicating the need for an internship upon the completion of the  first academic year. This is reflected as well in the high percentage (78%; n=253) of  International   students’ responses who selected Cyprus for the opportunity off ered to  work and study as well as for the easy admissions’ reputation.  4.2.   International Students’ Expectation Risk Assessment Matrix (ISERAM)  Figure 3:   International Students’ Expectation Risk Assessment Matrix  ISERAM  The quantitative analysis of the findings was completed in two parts. During the first part  the two important survey variables were compared: the importance of expectation as  opposed to its consequence on dropout intentions. The aim was to classify from lo w to  high risk all marketing and promotion - related information used by colleges to stimulate  International   students’ interest, and, hence to discover which marketing and promotion -  related information used may lead to high dropout intentions. This effort is   illustrated in  Figure 3. The ISERAM revealed the majority of Interpersonal - based Expectations to  dominate the high risk factors area on the matrix and be characterized as of extremely  high risk. The Implicit and Explicit - based Expectations are ranked as o f high risk,  followed   by   Static   Performance   Expectations.   The   findings   classify   Situational  Expectations as of moderate risk, leaving the Dynamic Performance Expectations along  with the Technological and Technical expectations at the low - risk level.  A fur ther analysis of the ISERAM showed that the extremely high risk factors are related  to psychographic - based expectations. This profiles the extremely high risk expectations  of the students to be driven actually only by their personal understanding and subje ctive  beliefs, opinions and aspirations regarding the meaning of study and work abroad.  Interpersonal  Implicit  Explicit  Static  Performance  Situational  Dynamic  Performance  Technical  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  0   1   2   3   4   5   6  Importance  Consequence  International Students' Expectations from the CY Hospitality &  Tourism Management Education  Low   Medium   High  Low   Medium   High

Page 13:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  281  Therefore, the findings reveal the significance of short - term financial gains from summer  internships or part - time jobs rather than the long - term and painful skill deve lopment  process. Such purchasing and consuming attitudes seem to value more opportunistic and  individualized approaches to selecting a program to study abroad. Hence, the personal  desire to escape the tyranny of routine in the home country leads to variou s and serious  misconceptions related to the freedom that a person may experience when living abroad.  Thus, the ISERAM indicates the social immaturity of a student along with the social and  personal skills needed to adapt to local social and cultural habits , and stresses the  possibility for an   International   student to show high dropout intentions in the host  country upon completion of their first academic year.  Therefore, the ISERAM revealed behavioral - based expectations (Implicit and Explicit -  based) to be   positioned as of high risk.   International   students display a highly libertarian  individualized buying behavioral pattern when making a purchase decision about  hospitality   and   tourism   management - related   studies   in   Cyprus.   The   behavioral  expectations showed   a grouping pattern concentrated on personal desire for monetary  and work experience based benefits and gains, followed by a necessity to differentiate  personal lifestyle in the host country. It seems that intentionally they are driven mainly  by factors ot her than academic ones when a purchase decision is made, such as the  combination of study and work, which may itself have positive outcomes. As a result,  college dropout turns out to be the logical sequence, the pathway and the consequence  from failing in   the fulfilment of personal agendas and plans.  Table   3 :   Descriptive statistics: Mean and SD test  Expectations   Mean   Standard  Deviation  Explicit Expectations   3.17   0.56  Implicit Expectations   3.34   0.79  Static Performance Expectations   2.01   0.47  Dynamic   Performance Expectations   1.36   0.32  Technological and Technical  Expectations   1.01   0.35  Situational Expectations   1.56   0.41  Interpersonal Expectations   3.78   0.73  4.3.   Statistical analysis  Following the development of the ISERAM, descriptive statistics were performed, in the  form of means and sample standard deviation tests, in order to examine data variation  concerning students’ responses in the context of the seven elements under investiga tion.  Table 1 summarizes, overall,   International   students’ responses to the seven expectation  variables that influence their personal expectations. The low standard deviation is  clustered closely around the sample population mean and the normality of the collected  data was examined by performing the Sha piro – Wilk test of normality. The goal was to  decide the type of the parametric or non - parametric tests to be used in order to compare  the variables of the study. According to the results, the answer distributions were not

Page 16:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  284  (3.78) the Im plicit (3.34) and the Explicit - based Expectations (3.17) showed the highest  mean, whereas Static Performance (2.01), Situational (1.56), Dynamic Performance  (1.36), and Technological and Technical Expectations (1.01) showed the lowest mean.  Therefore, to a nalyze the correlation between the seven factors affecting students’  expectations and college dropout intentions a linear equation modelling was established.  The   latent   independent   variables   were   Interpersonal   Expectations   (ξ1),   Explicit  Expectations (ξ2),   Implicit Expectations (ξ3), Static Performance Expectations (ξ4),  Situational   Expectations   (ξ5),   Dynamic   Performance   Expectations   (ξ6),   and  Technological and Technical Expectations with college dropout (η1) and graduation (η2)  as the latent dependent vari ables.  Table   6 :   College dropout and graduation intentions reliability analysis  Expectations   Mean   Cronbach’s   α  Explicit Expectations   3.17   0.81  Implicit Expectations   3.34   0.84  Static Performance Expectations   2.01   0.77  Dynamic Performance Expectations   1.36   0. 69  Technological and Technical Expectations   1.01   0.63  Situational Expectations   1.56   0.74  Interpersonal Expectations   3.78   0.86  The analysis of the linear structural equation model, through the LISREL8.52 software,  concerning college dropout   intentions and graduation are illustrated in Table 5. The  numbers among the dependent and independent variables illustrate path coefficients,  whereas those in parentheses represent the t - values of coefficients. The analysis of the  observed variables within   the structural model of the students’ expectations revealed  their impact on college dropout and graduation. They were found to have significant  factor loadings particularly for the dependent variables, Interpersonal, Implicit and  Explicit Expectations. Th e coefficients were ranged between 0.71 and 0.90, suggesting  a favorable fitness range. The t - values of measures were greater than 1.97, with the  exception of Technological and Technical Expectations and Dynamic Performance and  Situational Expectations. No   negative error variance or significant error variances were  found, indicating a favorable model fitness. Thus, the model fit indices (x² ratio = 2.45;  RMSEA = 0.09; NFI = 0.96; AGFI = 0.91) showed that the model fits the data,  considering as well that the   values of the fit measures met ideal standards (PGFI = 0.65;  PNFI = 0.76; RMR = 0.06). In addition, an internal structural fitness analysis was  performed to investigate the significance of the parameter value and the latent variables  along with the reliab ility of the perspective indicators (Table 5). The reliability factor  ranged between 0.61 and 0.82. The latent variables were ranged between 0.71 and 0.90.  All were at an acceptable level.  The findings of path coefficients between individual latent variab les showed that  Interpersonal, Implicit and Explicit - based Expectations have significant impact and the  biggest influence on dropout intentions and graduation (H1, H2 and H6 are supported).  Although Technological and Technical, and Dynamic Performance and   Situational

Page 18:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  286  The findings of the study are in accordance with existing studies that examined post -  purchase experience related to the quality or other various auxiliary elements of a  hospitality and tourism management   program (Ezeuduji et al. 2017; Farmaki 2016; Kim  and Park 2013; Lee and Chao 2013; Prugsamatz et al. 2006;   Robinson,   Ruhanen and  Breakey 2016; Zopiatis and Theocharous 2013). The contribution of the study to the  literature is as follows. First, the Interp ersonal Expectations revealed important insight  related to the high dropout rates of   International   students. This can be added to the  conclusions of Su et al. (2016) who determined that   International   students’ expectations  reflect mainly self - definitional   needs. Such needs are highly diversified and extremely  subjective, influencing   International   students in unpredictable ways. Borghi et al. (2016)  saw this kind of needs as very subjective, expressing only a personal point of view, which  depends solely on p ersonal agendas (Anastasiou and Koumis 2018). This is evidenced  as well by the responses concerning the importance of good quality and financially  rewarding internships or jobs and their financial ability to support their 4 - year program  of study. In both c ases, the reputation of the hospitality and tourism industry abroad  seems to be more influential for   International   students than the colleges’ reputations.  The identified Interpersonal Expectations in ISERAM are related to the students’  psychographic consuming patterns. The self - definitional needs of a student in relation to  their family’s past experience and expectations (Morgan 2014) seem to create a  confus ion judgment point concerning the type and the variety of the expectations from  hospitality and tourism studies in Cyprus (Nachmias et al. 2017). The psychographic  pattern is expressed through personal agendas, subjective expectations, and aspirations  rega rding the meaning of work and study abroad. Thus, participants acknowledge the  significance of the short - term financial gains from summer internships or part - time jobs  rather than the long - term and painful professional and skill development process. Such  a   psychographic pattern eases the psychological process of dropping out from college.  This is due to opportunistic buying behavior of   International   students infused with the  personal desire to escape the tyranny of routine in the home country. Consequently,  serious misconceptions related to financial or ethical obligations and responsibilities and  issues of personal independence and freedom are enhanced by the students’ social  immaturity. Even the whole concept of   international   studies, which is based on the  necessity to employ social and personal skills in order to adapt to the local society and  anticipate cultural implications, stresses the possibility for an   International   student to  show high dropout intentions in the host country upon the completion of th eir first  academic year.  Second, the ISERAM analysis portrays high risk factors to be related to students’  behavioral consuming patterns. The behavioral expectations (Implicit and Explicit -  based) specify a personal desire for monetary and work experience - based benefits and  gains from internships or jobs rather than the program’s accreditation, quality and  academic standards. Students, intentionally, are driven mainly by factors other than  academic ones when such a purchase decision is made. As a result, co llege dropout is  the logical outcome from failing in the fulfilment of personal agendas and plans. These  results   are   similar   to   previous   studies’   that   disclose   that   International   students’  expectations turn out to be too difficult and complicated to be ful filled due to the unique  character of education (Alfattal 2017; Prugsamatz et al. 2006) and its long - term nature  (Mainardes et al. 2013).

Page 1:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  269  MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS’  EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY HOSPITALITY AND  TOURISM HIGHER EDUCATION: AN EARLY  DROPOUT INDICATOR  Michael Anastasiou  Original scientific paper  Received 15 February 2019  Revised 22 April 2019  2   May 2019  Accepted 3 0   Ju ly   2019  https://doi.org/10.20867/thm.25.2.2  Abstract  Purpose   –   The study examined international students’ expectations when studying hospitality and  tourism related programs in private colleges in Cyprus, in order to determine any relation between  pre - purchased expectations and college dropout intentions.  Design / Me thodology / Approach   –   A sequential, mixed - methods approach was first implemented  through a qualitative exploration of a purposeful sample, where 24 new international students  participated in three different focus groups. Secondly, a survey method based on   the Qualtrics  market research concept, tested the hypotheses of the study and assisted in the development of the  International Students’ Expectation Risk Assessment Matrix (ISERAM). The questionnaires were  administered face - to - face to 324 new internationa l students.  Findings   –   The ISERAM analysis classified international students’ expectations in relation to  dropout intentions in a mixture of psychographic, behavioural and demographic consuming  factors. The ISERAM as a model, may indicate   a   future studen t learning engagement or  disengagement   with   academic   success   or   college   dropout,   respectively.   The   Interpersonal  Expectations were revealed as the most influential and high risk factor to   a   college dropout, altering  the   importance   of   the   interpersonal   and   subjective   nature   of   the   self - definitional   needs.  Furthermore, the behavioral expectations ( i mplicit and   e xplicit - based expectations) specify  students’ personal desire for monetary, work experience gains and industry reputation based  benefits from internsh ips rather than the program’s accreditation, quality and academic standards.  Originality   –   The ISERAM classifies international students’ expectations from   a   low to extremely  high risk, assisting private colleges to foresee possible dropout intentions for   better organizational  planning and academic sustainable development.  Keywords   Students’ expectations, hospitality and tourism studies, interpersonal expectations,  explicit or implicit expectations , Cyprus   studies  INTRODUCTION  Millennials seems to be more willing than ever to travel abroad for studies in order to  pursue personal agendas or career advancement, experience new cultures and lifestyles,  and develop unique personal or professional competencies (Cho   and   Morris 2015;  Costello 2015; Curtis   and   Ledgerwood 2017; Soto 2015 ; Armoo and Neequaye 2014 ).  Due to this international market trend of the rising demand for studies abroad, the  international   higher   education   arena   has   become   highly   competitive,   rendering

Page 6:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  274  Figure 1:   Conceptual   Framework  Private colleges, in this study, are defined as those non - university, higher education  institutions that offer accredited bachelor’s degrees according to the   academic standards  set by the Cyprus Agency of Quality Assurance and Accreditation in Higher Education  ( CYQAA ).   CYQAA   is responsible for the quality assurance standards of higher  education in Cyprus, including hospitality and tourism - related specialization s. The study  focuses on   i nternational   students coming from non - EU Member States and pursuing a  hospitality and tourism - related bachelor’s degree. The research is timely for the Cypriot  higher education arena due to national and   International   competition and the continuous  growth over the past years (Nachmias, Walmsleyb and Orphanidou 2017).  Cyprus is a higher education destination, and more particularly the number of private  colleges offering hospitality and tourism - related programs is stil l growing (Nachmias et  al.   2017),   yet   certain   challenges   are   being   faced   in   the   quality   assurance   and  organizational development process ( CYQAA   2018). Cyprus has a relatively short  experience as a global educational center, as its first public university w as established in  1992 and the first public university that offers hospitality and tourism studies was  established in 2007 (EMN 2012). Hospitality and tourism - related programs were  primarily the basic educational product developed and offered by profit - aim ing and  private - owned colleges (EMN 2012). This evidence may be justified by the fact that  Cyprus over the previous decades developed a strong image as a tourist destination at an  International   level (Nachmias et al. 2017).  In order to encrypt the marketing and promotional information used by private colleges  the Qualtrics market research concept was selected. Table 1 provides a list of definitions  of the seven adapted types of customer expectations examined in the current st udy. The  Qualtrics market research concept offered a multifaceted opportunity to investigate  international students’ expectations through the diversified lenses of seven different  types of customer expectations, serving a twofold purpose. First, it allowed   to understand  what   kind   of   expectations   and   how   pre - purchase – shaped   expectations   may   lead  international students to high college dropout intentions. Second, it assisted in widening  the cognitive horizon and gaining a comprehensive understanding of how mar keting info  used   by   private   colleges   may   lead   international   students   to   academic   success.  Consequently,   marketing - related   information   collected   directly   from   newcomers,  international students, will help in better understand the actual expectations, shaped   at  Explicit Expectations  Implicit Expectations  Static Performance  Expectations  Dynamic Performance  Expectations  Technological  Expectations  Interpersonal  Expectations  Situational  Expectations  Hospitality and  Tourism  Management  Responsiveness  Graduation  Dropout  Private  Colleges

Page 14:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  282  parametric (p < 0.05). All respons es were non - normal and the Mann – Whitney U,  Kruskal – Wallis and Wilcoxon tests were performed.  The Mann – Whitney test was applied to all Implicit - based Expectations, to examine  responses on the basis of students’ homeland residency, in cities or urban area.   The  statistical analysis showed that students in urban areas seem to be influenced differently  and at a much higher level than students who reside in cities. Considering that the Mann –  Whitney test is a non - parametric test examining the differences in the   median, the mean  values were also analyzed in order to distinguish the direction of the calculated  differences in the students’ responses (see Table 2). In Table 3, the descriptive statistical  analysis reveals that urban residency is higher on the scale f or all statements in all cases.  The use of the Kruskal – Wallis test, regarding differentiation in participants’ responses,  pinpointed Implicit and Interpersonal Expectations to be statistically significant.  Table   4 :   Mann – Whitney test for differences in stu dents’ Implicit Expectations  between city and urban residency in the home country  Mann – Whitney   p - value  Explicit Expectations   94.500   0.021  Implicit Expectations   91.000   0.010  Static Performance Expectations   89.500   0.007  Dynamic Performance   Expectations   82.500   0.005  Technological and Technical Expectations   91.500   0.011  Situational Expectations   92.000   0.012  Interpersonal Expectations   93.000   0.013  Additionally, a chi - square test and a cross - tabulation indicated that this tendency was  mainly due to the majority of participants coming from urban areas. Similarly, when the  Kruskal – Wallis test was implemented to detect any differences in the responses b etween  the two genders, beyond the Implicit and Interpersonal Expectations, the Explicit - based  marketing information was pinpointed. After performing a chi - square and a cross -  tabulation, this difference was found to be basically due to the higher responses   of  participants with family members or peers who have prior experience with   International  studies.  The Kruskal – Wallis test was performed as well in order to determine from the Implicit -  based Expectations any differences according to the financial ability of   International  students to cover full fees for a 4 - year program of study along with the living exp enses.  The test revealed a significant 63% (n=204) of participants report that they are able to  accommodate financial obligations for only 1 year. Then, a further study of the collected  data, using the chi - square and cross - tabulation, indicated that this h igh percentage was  basically due to participants’ low family incomes. Therefore, using participant family  income as a grouping variable, a chi - square was used to examine nominal data and the  Mann – Whitney   test   was   performed   to   examine   the   ordinal   data   relat ed   to   the  Interpersonal   Expectations.   Significant   differences   were   found   concerning   the

Page 15:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  283  participants’ urgency to do an internship or to get a job within the first 6 months of their  arrival in the host country (p < 0.05).  Table   5 :   Descriptive statistics f or the statements indicating differences in the  responses among students living in city or urban area in their home  country  Statistic   S Error  Explicit Expectations   City   3.71   0.199  Urban   4.96   0.163  Implicit Expectations   City   3.51   0.165  Urban   4.32   0.198  Static Performance Expectations   City   3.43   0.217  Urban   4.32   0.124  Dynamic Performance Expectations   City   3.51   0.227  Urban   4.42   0.234  Technological and Technical Expectations   City   3.99   0.219  Urban   5.04   0.082  Situational Expectations   City   3.83   0.213  Urban   4.68   0.239  Interpersonal Expectations   City   2.87   0.237  Urban   3.91   0.392  Similarly, the frequencies of the responses related to the Explicit - based Expectations  were analyzed to determine any possible frequencies. The specific frequencies were  reviewed using box plots to determine if the Explicit - based Expectations were signific ant  for dropout intentions using both nominal and ordinal data. When ordinal data was  examined using the Kruskal – Wallis test, two important frequencies were found to be  significant (p < 0.05). The frequencies were related to the websites’ (68%, n=220) and  social media content (81%, n=262). Also, a chi - square test was performed to determine  the   involved   ordinal   variables’   significance.   Three   statements   were   found   to   be  significant (p < 0.05): the easy accessibility to good jobs (87%, n=282), the excellent  qu ality internships (93%, n=302) and the fun student lifestyle (72%, n=233). Lastly, the  grouping   variables,   Static   Performance   Expectations,   Dynamic   Performance  Expectations, Technological and Technical Expectations, and Situational Expectations  were tested . The nominal and ordinal data were tested using chi - square Kruskal – Wallis,  respectively. The examination revealed that both nominal and ordinal data were not  affected, and no significant differences were found.  4.4.   Hypothesis and reliability analysis  A   reliability   analysis   of   the   seven   elements   influencing   International   students’  expectations   from   hospitality   and   tourism   higher   education   in   Cyprus   showed  Cronbach’s α (Table 4) ranging from 0.63 to 0.86. Of these factors, the Interpersonal

Page 17:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  285  Expectations have significant positive influence on graduation, no positive association  was found with dropout intentions. Then, hypotheses H3, H4, H5 and H7 are rejected.  Table   7 :   Internal structural fitness analysis: Significance of the parameter value,  individual and latent variables  Latent  Variable  Observed  Variable  Parameter  Value  (Estimated)  Reliability  (Individual  Item)  Reliability  (Latent  Variable)  Explicit Expec .   0.84   0.73  Implicit   Expec.   0.87   0.76  College  Dropout  Static  Performance  Expec.  0.78   0.65   0.82  College  Graduation  Dynamic  Performance  Expec.  0.73   0.63   0.67  Technological  and Technical  Expec.  0.71   0.61  Situational  Expec.   0.74   0.68  Interpersonal  Expec.   0.90   0.82  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS  This study aimed to map and examine   International   students’ expectations related to  college dropout intentions in hospitality and tourism higher education in Cyprus. To this  end, a sequential research design was conducted during the academic year 2017/2018.  This study contributes to the literature by ful filling a gap concerning what kind of  marketing - related information is used by   p rivate   or public   colleges, at the pre - purchase  stage, in order to stimulate   International   students’ expectations. The majority of existing  studies examined mainly the post - purc hase experience of   International   students or other  auxiliary elements such as summer internships, career choices or potentials (Ezeuduji et  al. 2017; Farmaki 2016; and   Kim and Park 2013; Lee and Chao 2013;   Robinson,  Ruhanen and Breakey 2016; Zopiatis and Theocharous 2013). This contribution was seen  in approaching   International   students’ expectations as a seven - dimensional variable that  is related and impacts students’ college dropout or graduation. The findings from   the  ISERAM analysis classified   International   students’ expectations in relation to dropout  intentions in a mixture of psychographic and behavioral consuming factors, highly  influenced   by   demographic   characteristics.   The   consuming   behavior   positions  Interna tional   students’ expectations from inelastic to extremely elastic emotional buying  and dropout behavior. Thus, the psycho - behavioral and demographic analysis, as a  pathway, may predict future student learning engagement or disengagement with  academic succe ss and graduation or college dropout, respectively.

Page 19:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  287  Third, the Interpersonal, Implicit and Explicit - based Expectations emerge as a mixture  of   psychographic   and   behaviora l   consuming   patterns   that   allow   no   limits   for  International   students to develop organizational citizenship and feelings of oneness with  the chosen study program   (Heffernan   et al. 2018 ). As a result, information downplays,  rumours   or stigmas from negative experiences will impede with severity the students’  emotional attachment towards graduation, leading to college dropout (Xiao and Lee  2014).   Such   a   psychological   and   behavioral   stance   produces   a   weak   emotional  engagement and apath y towards the studies, as the main motivations are the cost - related  factors such as the low tuition fees and living expenses. Even in the case of a good quality  internship,   International   students define it as a momentary benefit rather than a process  of ac quiring professional competencies for future career advancements, easing college  dropout.  Therefore, the findings of this study reveal that in order to eliminate students’ dropout  intentions, all demographic,   psychographic and behavioral information shoul d be  examined thoroughly by private colleges in Cyprus. This should take place using a non -  opportunistic approach, aiming at a long - run profitable marketing relationship for mutual  benefit. This requires the development of internal and external information   collection  mechanisms in order to understand in - depth the driving marketing information that  stimulates   International   students’ expectations (Dowel et al. 2015). For example,  integrated marketing communications, as an external information collection mecha nism,  could be used as an effective induction training tool as to what will follow in the host  country during studies. By following this approach, an indirect learning approach may  engage students in a process of gaining a more realistic and objective idea   of the student  life through the provision of detailed, authenticated and reliable information about the  program, the supportive services and the local lifestyle, prior to their application for and  registration in a program (Dowel et al. 2015). Accordingly , in the program admission  process an internal information collection mechanism should focus on an extensive  examination of the   International   students’ personal and agent generic profiles. At all  operational levels, the particular demographic characteristi cs and psycho - behavioral  consuming patterns should be examined for anticipation, framing simultaneously the  boarders of an early and silent dropout predictor/indicator.  The study had several limitations, providing an opportunity for further research on  im proving international students’ admission quality and eliminating dropout intentions  in public or private higher education colleges. First, the findings of the study concerned  a sample of only international students pursuing a bachelor’s in hospitality and   tourism  management along with the fact that the study was limited to the Cypriot higher  education market only. Second, no other program choices where examined, such as  business administration, marketing, human resource management, etc.  Testing the intern ational students’ expectations from studies abroad and particularly  from   a   micro - educational   destination,   through   the   lenses   of   an   interdisciplinary  approach, at a cross - national or international level could help private or public colleges  in consistently   profiling the demographic, psychographic, and behavioral consuming  factors that link emotional buying and dropout behaviour. Such a challenge recommends  and   orients a   future   two - dimensional   research investigation.   The   first   dimension  concerns further resea rch on the topic and could focus on developing a model for private

Page 22:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  290  Silverman, D. (2016),   Qualitative Research ,   SAGE Publications ,   New York.  Smith, S. (2018), “Customer expectations: 7 types an exceptional researcher must   Understand”,   Qualtrics .  Retrieved 19/05/2018 from:   https://www.qualtrics.com/blog/customer - expectations/  Soto, M.A.C. (2015), “Study abroad experience: personal and professional aftereffects of professors from   a  public costa Rican university”,   Revista De Lenguas Modernas ,   Vol.   22,   pp.   445 - 466.  https://do i.org/10.15517/rlm.v0i22.19703  Stage, K. F.   and   Manning, K. (2016),   Research in the College Context: Approaches and   Methods,   Routledge ,  New York.  Su, L., Swanson, S.R., Chinchanachokchai, S., Hsu, M.K. and Chen, X. (2016), “Reputation and intentions:  the role of satisfaction, identification, and commitment”,   Journal of Business Research ,   Vol.   69 ,  No.   9,   pp.   3261 - 3269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusr es.2016.02.023  The Cyprus Agency of Quality Assurance and Ac creditation in Higher Education   (2018 ) ,   Quality criteria for  accredited programs ,   Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports and Youth.  US   Department of Commerce (2016),   International statistics , US D epartment of Commerce, available at:  www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/international_statistics.html (accessed June 21, 2018).  Watjatrakul, B. (2014), “Factors affecting students’ intentions to study at universities adopting the student - as -  custom er conc ept”,   International Journal of Educational Management ,   Vol.   28 , No.   6,   pp.   676 -  693.   https://doi.org/10.1108/ijem - 09 - 2013 - 0135  Xiao, N. and Lee, H.S. (2014), “Brand identity fit in co - branding: the moderating role of CB identification and  consumer coping”,   European Journal of Marketing ,   Vol.   48 , No.   8,   pp.   1239 - 1254.  https://doi.org/10.1108/EJM - 02 - 2012 - 0075  Yin, K. R. (2017),   Case Study Research and A pplications: Design and Methods ,   SAGE Publications ,   New  York.  Zopiatis, A.   and   Theocharous, A. (2013), “Revisiting hospitality internship practices: A   Holistic Investigation”,  Journal of Hospitality, Leisure, Sport & Tourism Education ,   Vol.   13,   pp.   33 - 46.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhlste.2013.04.002  Michael Anastasiou , DBA,   Associate Professor  InterNapa College / Faculty of Hospitality Management and Culinary Arts  Hospitality Department  4 Griva Digeni Av.   Ammochostos, Cyprus  Phone:   +35799474524  E - mail:   m.anastasiou@internapa .ac.cy  Please cite this article as:  Anastasiou, M. (2019), Mapping International Students’ Expectations from the CY Hospitality and  Tourism Higher Education: An Early Dropout Indicator , Tourism and Hospitality Management,  Vol. 25, No. 2,   pp.   2 69 - 29 0 ,   https://doi.org/10.20867/thm.25.2.2  Creative Commons Attribution   –   Non Commercial   –   Share Alike 4.0 International

Page 11:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  279  Table 2:   International Students Demographic and Deci sion Stimulators  Age   n   %   Economic Status   N   %  18   –   23   138   44%   Low   168   52%  24   –   29   85   27%   Moderate   87   27%  30   –   35   66   21%   Very Good   53   16%  36   –   41   21   4%   High   16   5%  42 <   14   4%  Gender   n   %   Personal Status   N   %  Male   196   60%   Married   78   24%  Female   128   40%   Single   246   76%  Location   n   %   Prior studies   n   %  City   90   28%   Bachelor's   73   24%  Country Site   106   33%   HND   38   12%  Seaside   54   17%   Diploma   24   7%  Mount.   Area   72   22%   Certificate   21   6%  High Sch. Leav. C   168   51%  Financial   ability   to   cover   all   fees  needed for a four year programme of  study.  Financial ability to cover all living expenses  needed for a four year programme of study.  <25%   84   26%   <25%   50   15%  25%   77   24%   25%   124   62%  50%   128   40%   50%   83   13%  75%   24   7%   75%   46   7%  100%   11   3%   100%   21   3%  How urgent is it, to do your internship  or to get your first job in order to  maintain an income?  What   was   your   main   drive   to   choose   a  bachelor's degree at a CY   private college?  Immediately   0   0%   Work & Study   134   42%  in 3 months   28   9%   Industry's reputation   66   21%  in 6 months   52   16%   Reputation of studies   53   16%  in 9 months   101   31%   Easy admissions   50   15%  in a year   143   44%   Move/other/country   21   6%  The study levels and the above demographics of the families are reflected as well in the  economic status of the families as 78% (n=255) of the participants reported a low to  moderate   economic   status   for   their   respective   families.   The   findings   from   the  quan titative survey uncover another tendency related to the financial ability of the  participants to fully support financially their studies during a 4 - year program of study.  Fifty per cent (n=161) and 81% (n=261) of the participants respectively stated that t hey  can fully support their tuition fees and living expenses during the first year of their

Page 20:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  288  or public colleges’ marketing intelligence systems that   facilitates effectively and  proactively   utilizing   the   demographic,   psychographic,   and   behavioral   consuming  profiles of international   students. The second dimension concerns future research in  enlightening   international   students’   personal   drives   and   agendas.   By   gaining   a  comprehensive understanding of their self - definitional needs, this could assist private  and public colleges’ stakehold ers in building common agendas for mutual benefit.  REFERENCES  Abratt, R. and   Kleyn, N. (2012), “Corporate identity, corporate branding and corporate reputations:  reconciliation and integration”,   European Journal of Marketing ,   Vol.   46 ,   No.   8 ,   pp.   1048 - 1063.  https://doi.org/10.1108/03090561211230197  Ahmad, S. (2015), “Evaluating student satisfaction of quality at international branch campuses”,   Assessment  & Evaluation in Higher Education ,   Vol.   40 ,   No.   4,   pp.   488 - 507.  https://doi.org/10.1080/0260293 8.2014.925082  Alfattal, E. (2017), “International students’ college choice is different!”   International   Journal   of Educational  Management ,   Vol.   31 , No.   7,   pp.   930 - 943.   https://doi.org/10.1108/ijem - 05 - 2016 - 0095  Alonso - Almeida, D. M., Marimon, F., Casani, F.   and   Rodriguez - Pomeda, J. (2015),   “Diffusion of sustainability  reporting in universities: current situation and   future perspectives”,   Journal of Cleaner Production ,  Vol.   106,   pp.   144 - 154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.02.008  Anastasiou, M.   and   Koumi, I. (2018), “Examining the factors affecting students’ perceptions and vocational  program choices: A case study of the vocational   and technical schools of Cyprus ” ,   Cyprus Journal  of Sciences ,   Vol.   18 , No.   1,   pp.   64 - 82.  Armoo, K. A.   and   Neequaye,   K.   (2 014), “Factors used by Ghanaian students in determining career options in  the tourism and hospitality industry: Lessons for developing   countries ” ,   Worldwide Hospitality and  Tourism Themes ,   Vol.   6 , No.   2,   pp.   166 - 178. doi:   https://doi.org/10.1108/whatt - 12 - 2 013 - 0053  Berman, A. E. (2017), “An Exploratory Sequential Mixed Methods Approach to Understanding Researchers’  Data Management Practices at UVM: Integrated Findings to   Develop Research Data Services”,  Journal of eScience Librarianship ,   Vol.   6 , No.   1 , pp.   e1104 .  https://doi.org/10.7191/jeslib.2017.1104  Bohman, E. (2014), “Attracting the world: institutional initiatives’ effects on international students’ decision  to enroll”,   Community College Journal of Research and Practice ,   Vol.   38 , No.   8,   pp.   710 - 720.  https://doi.org/10.1080/10668926.2014.897081  Bonaldo, L.   and   Pereira, N. L. (2016), “Dropout: Demographic profile o f Brazilian university students ” ,  Procedia   –   Social Science and Behavioral Sciences ,   Vol.   228,   pp.   138 - 143.  doi:   https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.sbspro.2016.07.020  Borghi, S., Mainardes, E.   and   Silva, E. (2016), “Expectations of higher education students: a comparison  between the perception of student and teachers”,   Tertiary Education and Management ,   Vol.   22 , No.  2,   pp.   171 - 188.   https://doi.org/10.1080/13583883.2016.1188326  Carey, M. A.   and   Asbury E . (2016),   Focus Groups Research ,   Routledge , New York.  Chen, L.H. (2007), “East - International students’ choice of Canadian gra duate schools”,   International Journal  of Education Advancement ,   Vol.   7 , No.   4,   pp.   271 - 306.  https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.ijea.2150071  Chen, C.H. and Zimitat, C. (2006), “Understanding Taiwanese students’ decision - making factors regarding  Australian i nternational higher education”,   International Journal of Education Management ,   Vol.  20 , No.   2,   pp.   91 - 100. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513540610646082  Cho, J. and Morris, M.W. (2015), “Cultural study and problem - solving gains: effects of study abroad, openness,  and choice”,   Journal of Organizational Behavior ,   Vol.   36 ,   No.   7,   pp.   944 - 966.  https://doi.org/10.1002/job.2028  Costello, J. (2015), “Students’   stories of studying abroad: reflections upon return”,   Journal of   International  Students ,   Vol.   5 , No.   1,   pp.   50 - 59.  Creswell, J.W. (2013),   Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing among Five   Approaches , Sage,  Los Angeles.  Creswell, J.W.   and Plano C lark, V.L. (2011),   Designing and Conducting Mixed   Methods Research , Sage, Los  Angeles.

Page 21:
Tourism and Hospitality Management, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp.   2 69 - 290 ,   2019  Anastasiou, M., MAPPING INTERNATIONAL STUDENT S’ EXPECTATIONS FROM THE CY   ...  289  Curtis, T.   and   Ledgerwood, R. T. (2018), “Students’ motivations, perceived benefits and constraints towards  study abroad and other international education   opportunities”,   Journal of International Education  in Business ,   Vol.   11 , No.   1,   pp.   63 - 78.   https://doi.org/10.1108/jieb - 01 - 2017 - 0002  East, R. (2013),   Consumer Behavior: Application in   Marketing , Sage Publications, Oxford.  European   Miggration Network. (2012),   Immigration of i nternational students to the EU ,   Cyprus Ministry of  Interior.   Republic of Cyprus.  Ezeuduji, O.I., Chibe, E. M.   and   Nyathela, T. (2017), “Student profile and perceptions of Ho spitality  Management education: Universities in South Africa”,   African   Journal of Hospitality, Tourism and  Leisure ,   Vol.   6 , No.   3 ,   pp. 313 - 324 .  Farmaki, A. (2016), “Tourism and hospitality internships: a determinant of students’ career intentions” ,  Confer ence paper presented at the   2nd Global Tourism & Hospitality Conference ,   a t Hong Kong  Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, 16 - 18 May, 2016.  Garbati, J.F. and Rothschild, N. (2016), “Lasting impact of study abroad experiences: a collaborative  autoethnography” ,   Forum: Qualitative Social Research ,   Vol.   17 , No.   2,   pp.   1 - 19.  Headar, M., E laref, N. and Yacout, O. (2013),   “ Antecedents and Consequences of Student Satisfaction with e -  Learning: The Case of Private Universities in Egypt ”,   Journal of Marketing for Higher Education ,  Vol.   23, pp. 226 - 257 .   https://doi.org/10.1080/08841241.2013.867919  Heffernan, T., Wilkins, S.   and   Butt, M. M. (2018), “Transnational higher education: The importance of  institutional reputation, trust and student - university identificatio n in international partnerships ” ,  International Journal of   Educational Management,   Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 227 - 240.  https://doi.org/10.1108/ijem - 05 - 2017 - 0122  Jillapalli, K. R.   and   Jillapalli, R. (2014), “Do professors have customer - based brand equity?”,   Journal of  Marketing for Higher Education ,   Vol.   24 , No.   1,   pp.   22 - 40.  https://doi.org/10.1080/08841241.2014.909556  Johnson, R.B. and Onwuegbuzie, A.J. (2004), “Mixed methods research: a research paradigm whose time has  come”,   Educational Researcher , Vol. 33 ,   No. 7,   pp.   24 - 26.  https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X033007014  Kim, H. B.   and   Park, E. J. (2013), “The role of   social experience in undergraduates’ Career p erceptions through  internships”,   Journal of Hospitality, Leisure, Sport & Tourism Education ,   Vol.   12 , No.   1,   pp.   70 -  78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhlste.2012.11.003  Kotler, P.   and   Keller, L.K. (2015),   Marketing   Management , 15th ed., Pearson Education, New York, NY .  Lee, C. S.   and   Chao, C.W. (2013), “Intention to ‘leave’ or ‘stay’   –   the role of internship   organization in the  improvement of hospitality students’ sector employment   intentions ” ,   Asia Pacific Journal of  Tourism Research ,   Vol.   18 , No.   7,   pp.   749 - 765.   https://doi.org/10.1080/10941665.2012.695290  Lincoln, Y. S.   and   Guba,   E.G. (2013),   The constructivist credo,   Walnut Creek, CA .  Mainardes, E., Alves, H.   and   Raposo, M. (2013), “Portuguese public university   student satisfaction: A  sta keholder theory - based approach”,   Tertiary Education and Management ,   Vol.   19,   pp.   353 - 372.  https://doi.org/10.1080/13583883.2013.841984  McMahon, M.E. (1992), “Higher education in a world market: an historical look at the global co ntext of  international study”,   Higher Education ,   Vol.   24 , No.   4,   pp.   465 - 482.  https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00137243  Morgan, M. (2014), “Study expectations of 1st/2nd generation STEM postgraduate taught students”,   Quality  Assurance in Education ,   Vol.   22 , No.   2,   pp.   169 - 184.   https://doi.org/10.1108/qae - 03 - 2013 - 0014  Nachmias, S., Walmsleyb, A.   and   Orphanidou, Y. (2017), “Students’ perception towards hospitality education:  An anglocypriot critical study”,   Journal of Hospitality, Leisure, Sport & Tourism   Education ,   Vol.  20,   pp.   134 - 145. doi.org/10.1016/j.jhlste.2017.04.007  Parahoo, S.,   Harvey, H. and Tamim, R. (2013),   “ Factors influencing student satisfaction in universities in the  Gulf region: Does gender of   students   matter? ”   Journal of Marketing for   High er Education ,   Vol.   23 ,  pp. 135 - 54.   https://doi.org/10.1080/08841241.2013.860940  Pimpa, N. (2005), “Marketing Australian universities to Thai students”,   Journal of Studies in International  Education ,   Vol.   9 , No. 2,   pp.   137 - 143.   h ttps://doi.org/10.1177/1028315305274857  Prugsamatz, S., Pentecost, R.   and   Ofstad, L. (2006), “The influence of explicit and implicit service promises  on Chinese students’ expectations of overseas universities",   Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and  Logistics ,   Vol.   18 , No.   2,   pp.   129 - 145. https://doi.org/10.1108/13555850610658273  Robinson, R., Ruhanen, L. and Breakey, N. (2015) ,   “ Tourism and hospitality internships: influences on student  career aspirations”,   Current Issues in Tourism ,   Vol.   19, pp. 1 - 1 5.  https://doi.org/10.1080/13683500.2015.1020772  Saiti, A., Papa, R.   and   Brown, R. (2017), “Postgraduate students’ factors on program choice   and expectation ” ,  Journal of Applied Research in Higher Education ,   Vol.   9 , No.   3,   pp.   407 - 423.  https://doi.org/10.1108/jarhe - 06 - 2016 - 0040

