Page 15:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   15   frontiersin.org  Qvortrup, A., and Lykkegaard, E (2024b) Justifying methodologies in educational  research: Epistemological paradigms as logics of justification and frames of inquiry. [in review].  Powers, T. E., and Watt, H. M. (2021). Understanding why apprentices consider  dropping out: longitudinal prediction of apprentices’ workplace interest and anxiety.  Empir. Res. Vocat. Educ. Train.   13:9. doi:   10.1186/s40461-020-00106-8  Rahn, M. (2014). Factor analysis: a short introduction  Roese, N. J., and Summerville, A. (2005). What we regret most... And why.   Personal.  Soc. Psychol. Bull.   31, 1273–1285. doi:   10.1177/0146167205274693  Sadler, P. M., Sonnert, G., Hazari, Z., and Tai, R. (2012). Stability and volatility of  STEM career interest in high school: a gender study.   Sci. Educ.   96, 411–427. doi:   10.1002/  sce.21007  Sandler, M. E. (2000). Career decision-making self-efficacy, perceived stress, and an  integrated model of student persistence: a structural model of finances, attitudes, behavior,  and career development.   Res. High. Educ.   41, 537–580. doi:   10.1023/A:1007032525530  Schönrock-Adema, J., Heijne-Penninga, M., Van Hell, E. A., and Cohen-Schotanus, J.  (2009). Necessary steps in factor analysis: enhancing validation studies of educational  instruments. The PHEEM applied to clerks as an example.   Med. Teach.   31, e226–e232.  doi:   10.1080/01421590802516756  St. John, E. P., Paulsen, M. B., and Starkey, J. B. (1996). The nexus between college  choice and persistence.   Res. High. Educ.   37, 175–220. doi:   10.1007/BF01730115  Tierney, W. G. (1999). Models of minority college-going and retention: cultural  integrity versus cultural suicide.   J. Negro Educ.   68, 80–91. doi:   10.2307/2668211  Tinto, V. (1975). Dropout from higher education: a theoretical synthesis of recent  research.   Rev. Educ. Res.   45, 89–125. doi:   10.3102/00346543045001089  Tinto,   V.   (1997).   Classrooms   as   communities:   exploring   the   educational  character of student persistence.   J. High. Educ.   68, 599–623. doi:   10.1080/00221546.  1997.11779003  Truta, C., Parv, L., and Topala, I. (2018). Academic engagement and intention to drop  out: levers for sustainability in higher education.   Sustain. For.   10:4637. doi:   10.3390/  su10124637  Tuominen-Soini, H., Salmela-Aro, K., and Niemivirta, M. (2012). Achievement goal  orientations and academic well-being across the transition to upper secondary  education.   Learn. Individ. Differ.   22, 290–305. doi:   10.1016/j.lindif.2012.01.002  Ursachi, G., Horodnic, I. A., and Zait, A. (2015). How reliable are measurement scales?  External factors with indirect influence on reliability estimators.   Procedia Econ. Financ.  20, 679–686. doi:   10.1016/S2212-5671(15)00123-9

Page 1:
Frontiers in   Education   01   frontiersin.org  Longitudinal mixed-methods  analysis of tertiary students’  dropout considerations  Eva Lykkegaard  * and Ane Qvortrup  Department of Design, Media and Educational Science, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,  Denmark  The paper presents a longitudinal mixed methods study investigating tertiary  humanity students’ dropout considerations, utilizing Tinto’s institutional departure  model as theoretical background. The research question is: How do students’  dropout considerations take form and evolve throughout tertiary education?  Methodically we have collected half-yearly register and survey data from 2,781  tertiary humanities students matriculating in 2017–2019. Additionally, we have  conducted half-yearly interviews with 14 focus students that had high dropout  considerations in the first survey round. Quantitative analysis of all humanity  students and qualitative analysis of three case students are presented and  discussed. The complementary analysis provides an in-depth understanding of  the complex interplay between individual characteristics and institutional factors  in shaping different students’ dropout considerations and decisions in tertiary  education. We find that there is a stable share of students with low, medium, and  high dropout considerations throughout time. However, although we find stable  shares, we identify primary movements from high dropout considerations towards  dropout, and from low dropout considerations towards completion, we   also  find considerable secondary movement (i.e., from low dropout considerations  towards dropout). As is also confirmed in the qualitative analyses, there are  significant   fluctuations   in   some   students’   dropout   considerations.   Dropout  considerations are thus malleable and do not necessarily accumulate linearly over  time to dropout. Individual students’ dropout considerations change repeatedly in  interaction with their experiences, their expectations for the future as well as with  current challenges in meeting academic and personal requirements. Challenges  are often about a lack of alignment between expectations and experiences and  how well students and the study programs’ norms and values match. We find  students who seek to improve this match through personal transformations  and others who try to change their study program. In both regards successfully  improving the match seems to be a profitable strategy to prevent dropout.  KEYWORDS  tertiary education, Tinto’s institutional departure model, dropout considerations,  expectancies and experiences, mixed methods, longitudinal studies  Introduction  In 1975, Tinto introduced his institutional departure model as a counter-response to  dropout models focusing solely on students’ psychological factors and individual characteristics  ( Aljohani, 2016 ;   Gore and Metz, 2017 ). Tinto’s model (see   Figure 1 ) proposed to understand  dropout as a longitudinal process involving a complex matrix of interactions between the  OPEN ACCESS  EDITED BY  Judith Schoonenboom,  University of Vienna, Austria  REVIEWED BY  Gail Augustine,  Walden University, United States  Augustin Kelava,  University of Tübingen, Germany  Luise Heusel,  University of Tübingen, Germany,  in collaboration with reviewer AK  *CORRESPONDENCE  Eva Lykkegaard  eval@sdu.dk  RECEIVED   14 March 2024  ACCEPTED   20 June 2024  PUBLISHED   13 August 2024  CITATION  Lykkegaard E and Qvortrup A (2024)  Longitudinal mixed-methods analysis of  tertiary students’ dropout considerations.  Front. Educ.   9:1399714.  doi: 10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  COPYRIGHT  © 2024 Lykkegaard and Qvortrup. This is an  open-access article distributed under the  terms of the   Creative Commons Attribution  License (CC BY) . The use, distribution or  reproduction in other forums is permitted,  provided the original author(s) and the  copyright owner(s) are credited and that the  original publication in this journal is cited, in  accordance with accepted academic  practice. No use, distribution or reproduction  is permitted which does not comply with  these terms.  TYPE   Original Research  PUBLISHED   13 August 2024  DOI   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714

Page 2:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   02   frontiersin.org  individual (including background variables such as gender, age, social  background, and prior educational experiences) and an academic  system with subcategories such as interaction with personnel and  academic achievements and a social system with subcategories such  as extracurricular activities and interactions with fellow students of  the institution. The 1997 model places classroom activities (classroom,  labs, studios) as straddling both the social system and the academic  system, suggesting that they overlap the two systems and are keys to  improving student integration or identification.  The systems continually modify the student’s academic and social  integration, leading either to   persistence   (the choice to continue  studying) or   departure   (the choice to drop out). This focus as well as  the variables   intentions   and   goal commitment , which in the model are  proposed   to   mediate   between   the   institutional   meeting   and  persistence/departure, leave space for individuality and for dropout to  be understood as the student’s active decision.  Tinto’s model has been suggested to indicate a change in paradigm  in the field of dropout research and it is still today one of the most used  and cited models in the field of higher education student dropout  ( Braxton and Hirschy, 2004 ,   p. 89). Two of the central interrelated  variables are suggested to be students’ considerations regarding or  intention of dropout ( Tinto, 1975 ) and their motivation to or intention  of persistence ( Tinto, 1997 ). These variables are also described as  important mediators for dropout in a number of later dropout theories  (e.g.,   Bean, 1983 ;   Astin, 1984 ;   Bean and Metzner, 1985 ;   Eaton and  Bean, 1995 ;   St. John et al., 1996 ;   Tierney, 1999 ;   Sandler, 2000 ;   Bean and  Eaton, 2002 ). Based on this, considerations regarding or intentions of  dropout are often used as an early alert proxy for dropout ( Eicher et al.,  2014 ;   Truta et al., 2018 ). However, in a newly study on dropout among  students   in   humanities   study   programs,   we   found   dropout  considerations to be a weak predictor of dropout. Although, as we show  in this current article, there is a stable and high percentage of students  with   dropout   considerations   throughout   the   education   course  (between 19 and 24%), dropout considerations across semesters predict  less than 10% of students’ actual dropout ( Qvortrup and Lykkegaard,  2024a ). Considerations about dropping out are apparently something  that many students have, without it necessarily ending up with them  quitting their study program. The question is then, how can  we understand these considerations? In a meta-analysis of studies on  human regrets,   Roese and Summerville (2005)   find that the two  choices in life that people most often regret are their educational and  career choices. Are the dropout considerations thus an expression of  regret regarding the choice of education already starting during their  education?   Another   possibility   is   to   understand   the   dropout  considerations not as a regret (i.e., a feeling which is linked backward  to the educational choice one had made), but as a fundamental doubt  linked to the future opportunities that the education provides. It is not  unreasonable to assume that such a forward-oriented feeling linked to  the choice of education has increased with a heightened sense of  existential vulnerability and declining trust in democratic institutions  ( Common Worlds Research Collective, 2020 ). This kind of doubt is not  necessarily negative, as suggested by   Herrmann et al. (2015)   who  describe a kind of doubt among university students that is related to  their academic identity and experience of meaningfulness. This doubt,  they suggest, is constructive, because it causes the students to shape  themselves and their identity in interaction with their social and  academic environment. Furthermore, it causes them to make informed  choices ( Herrmann et al., 2015 ). This is a completely different form of  student doubt than the negative one described in   Hovdhaugen and  Aamodt (2009) ,   which is rooted in either administrative requirements  that the student cannot handle, or in a (not always well-founded) fear  of not being able to fulfill academic standards. The relevance of  distinguishing between constructive and non-constructive doubt is  confirmed in   Hovdhaugen (2009) ,   who shows that doubt reasoned in  a lack of alignment between expectations for and experiences of the  educational content in the study program, to a greater extent resulted  FIGURE 1  Modified institutional departure model (Reproduced with permission,   Tinto, 1997 , p. 615).

Page 6:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   06   frontiersin.org  noticeably consistent among the enrolled students throughout a  period where more and more students either drop out or complete  their   study   program. This could indicate that some students  accumulate their dropout considerations and drop out, after which  approximately the same share of new students start accumulating  dropout considerations without accumulating to drop out. However,  the Sankey diagram in   Figure 2 , tells a different story, contributing to  challenge the suggestion of   Hobfoll (2011)   that students’ dropout  considerations accumulate over time.  Figure 2 , visualizes fluctuations in students’ dropout considerations  between low, medium, and high dropouts. The horizontal dimension  shows time with the six semesters indicated at the bottom. The surveys  were answered in the middle of the semester whereas the register data  were accumulated and plotted for the beginning and middle of the  semester. The vertical dimension presents the distribution of the 141  students in five different groups according to dropout, dropout  considerations (high, medium, low), or study completion at each  semester. The colored bands illustrate the identified flows between the  five groups. The widths of the individual colored bands are proportional  to the share of the 141 students in it. The proportion of students  identified to have “low dropout rates” is thus the wide light green band  at the left top thinning out across time (moving right). This band  includes both students who continually indicated low dropout  considerations and those who came from medium (i.e., the yellow band)  or high (i.e., the orange band) dropout considerations.  The range of different identified patterns/fluctuations represented  in   Figure   2   emphasizes   the   dynamics   in   students’   dropout  considerations. Although there seems to be a primary movement from  high dropout considerations (orange) towards dropout (red) and from  low dropout considerations (light green) towards completion (dark  green), there are also considerable secondary movements, e.g., from  low dropout considerations (light green) towards dropout (red)—see  second and third semesters in   Figure 2 . Likewise, there are noticeable  movements from high dropout considerations (orange) toward study  completion (dark green) in the fourth and sixth semesters. It is  important to note, that we   cannot assume linearity in dropout  considerations from one measurement point to the next. Underneath  the identified patterns—primary as well as secondary movements—  there might be additional oscillations.  Table 5   illustrates a summed view of the students’ identified  movements from low, medium, or high dropout considerations in one  semester to their dropout considerations, dropout, or completion in the  next semester. The dropout rate is highest for students with high dropout  considerations (30%) and the completion rate is highest for students with  low dropout considerations (9%), however, there is also considerable  dropout for students with low dropout considerations (6%) and likewise  noticeable   completion   rates   for   students   with   high   dropout  considerations (5%). With this table, it is therefore firmly established that  dropout cannot, at least not for all students, be understood as a result of  linear accumulated dropout considerations. We have groups of students  for whom the fluctuations in dropout considerations follow a completely  different non-accumulating pattern. Perhaps some of these students’ high  dropout considerations are of the positive type that we referenced  Herrmann et al. (2015)   to describe. For other students, particularly those  with low dropout considerations that drop out, the mechanism must  be completely different and rapidly changing. Regarding the students,  whose dropout considerations do accumulate towards dropout, based on  Table 5   and   Figure 2 , we can conclude that the accumulations occur at  different speeds (orange to red, yellow to red, and green to red in  consecutive semesters).  Case students’ tertiary educational stories  Table 6   shows the educational status over time of the 14 focus  students participating. The color shows whether the students are  FIGURE 2  Sankey diagram showing fluctuations in students’ dropout considerations. The horizontal dimension presents time and the vertical dimension presents  the distribution of students ( N   = 141) at each semester in five different groups: Dropout (red), high dropout considerations (orange), medium dropout  considerations (yellow), low dropout considerations (light green), or study completion (dark green). The colored bands illustrate the flows between the  five groups. The widths of the individual bands are proportional to the share of students in it.

Page 8:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   08   frontiersin.org  pursuing some other tertiary education and looking forward to more.  However, when Ingrid started her studies, she felt overwhelmed:  "I was very surprised, and I felt completely thrown off. I thought,  'You can't be so stupid and clueless that you don't understand this.'  I was really knocked down. I can't exactly say what it was that  knocked me down, but it was as if my entire identity was being torn  apart in some way."   (First interview)  Ingrid herself sees one reason for her feeling that her identity is  being torn apart is the academic level (cf.   Hovdhaugen and Aamodt,  2009 , academic requirements):  "Because I could feel it in the academic field, and we even started  quite slowly, I think, looking back now, but I could feel that having  to sit down and engage with reading a text and then understand it  afterward, and try to extract from it with the knowledge I had back  then, it was a big task."   (First interview)  In addition to the difficulties in meeting administrative and  academic requirements (suggested by   Hovdhaugen and Aamodt,  2009 ), Ingrid believes that her age also affects her experience of the  academic requirements:   “And I can also feel that I’m not quite young  anymore. My age also plays a role. I do not have the same reading speed  anymore, and I do not have the same working memory when it comes  to approaching new things.”   (First interview). Ingrid additionally points  out some personal issues. She had to work full-time alongside studying  because she could not take leave from her job. This is uncommon in  Denmark, where the government provides financial support (“SU”)  for education. She would also like to   “have time for her family”   and she  believes that   “It can be difficult to fit it in compared to starting a study  at the age of 20” :  "And this whole thing about losing... Not having anything stable,  not having this structure around it, it has taken me some time to  build it up."   (First interview)  In addition to the academic requirements, Ingrid thus faces  personal requirements within two sub-categories: financial and  family care, referring to her resources, costs, and values. The  academic   and   personal   requirements   jointly   fueled   Ingrid’s  dropout considerations:  "It's been a really tough start. And I've also been close to quitting  and thought that I shouldn't expose myself to this [...] My goal was  that I would try until the fall break [the semester starts in September  and the fall break is in October]. I said that I had to do that,  otherwise, you simply can't just quit. But until the fall break was my  goal, and then it had to bear or break, whatever was going to happen  then. Also, if I found out whether I could even learn this. And if  I can figure out how to write in this way. And I have now realized  that I can. It just takes time for me. It takes time for me to read,  understand, and use it academically. [...] And when I had written  it [exam assignment during the fall break], been through it, and  passed it, I could feel that I had the courage for more. Because I've  always found this incredibly exciting. It's incredibly exciting to  be enriched by different knowledge and knowledge from completely  different angles than the ones I encounter in my work practice and  in my social circle. It gives me a lot to encounter knowledge in this  way."   (First interview)  Thus, Ingrid’s dropout considerations were fueled by negative  experiences, as described in   Hovdhaugen and Aamodt (2009) .  However, as the above quote shows, the dropout considerations also  seem to be counteracted or diminished by positive experiences. Ingrid  has the experience that she has cracked the academic code. At times  she seems surprised and impressed by her knowledge and her new  study approach. She says,   “And sometimes I can hear myself saying ‘how  do you know that’?’, ‘what is it based on?’. I have suddenly started to  be much more critical regarding what I read. In what I am asked to do,  and in the way I approach things.”   (First interview). At this point, she  no longer had dropout considerations:  "No, because then I took the next step, which was until Christmas.  I have taken it very gradually to keep myself up saying, this is what  I need to do right now. My considerations about it are that I cannot  have both a full-time job and study on the side. And I don't want to  do that to myself. I don't want to do both things halfway. So, I have  to make a decision soon about what I'll do. And it's simply because  I can only get SU [student grant], and I can't live off that. I must  realize that I simply can't. I don't want to have to sell my house and  everything for that..."   (First interview)  Ingrid’s experience of being able to master requirements added to  her personal transformation:  "It has taken me a long time to set aside my youth care worker title  and get used to the student title. This thing about being a student.  I might be a youth care worker, but right now, I am a student, and  this is where I   am, and this is what I   have to deal with."  (First interview)  However, the dropout considerations returned, and at the end of  the first semester, she says   “But I can feel now that the study has taken  a turn because I am currently experiencing that it has become really  difficult. It’s because there is a lot of literature in English, and it requires  even more of me to deal with it.”   Once again, she has given herself a  new deadline. She said:   “Now I have at least tried to finish it until Easter  [halfway through the second semester] where there will be a change  again.”   (First interview). By the time of the second interview,  Ingrid says:  "Well, the way it's gone is that shortly after we talked, I think it's at  that point I go on sick leave. Or at least I become ill. And I am sent  to the hospital for a check, with the aim of diagnosing cancer in my  stomach and then subsequently cancer in my throat." [...] After  about a month and a half in the diagnostic process, fortunately,  cancer is not found. Something else is found, but it is not life-  threatening in any way. But after that period, there is an exam, and  I would say that's when I really hit rock bottom."   (Second interview)  "And then I couldn't bear the idea that I had to be in it [...] So, the  study is on hold because I haven't enrolled in classes here after. And  I haven't done that because then I completely fell out of the system.  And I could see that I couldn't catch up within the standard time  that the study is set for."   (Second interview)

Page 10:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   10   frontiersin.org  Abi’s considerations about dropping out largely revolve around the  study program or what   Tinto (1975)   terms the academic system. She  did not feel that she was sufficiently challenged academically:  “I attend the classes and I study my material. I want it to make sense  to me. But then you sit, for example, in this class yesterday, and I feel  like it's the same thing that was covered last week. And it's also  because they have to consider that we come from so many different  places, but some things are really spoon-fed. Where you think,  we can probably move on to something else now."   (First interview)  In addition to the academic level, Abi thought the program lacked  depth, that it tried to cover too broad a spectrum, and she says that  she often   “misses the point”   of the texts they read and therefore  questions their relevance. Interestingly, Ingrid’s experiences of lack of  understanding lead her to criticize herself (lack of skills), while Abi  directs the problem at the study program. It seems that the former  inward orientation increases dropout considerations, while the latter  outward orientation decreases them.  A final outward critique from Abi, has to do with her being  dissatisfied with the teachers, and her dropout considerations are  therefore also reasoned in   Tinto’s (1997)   category ‘Classroom  activities’. Abi has been openly critical of the teachers since the first  semester, and this criticism continues throughout the rest of  the interviews:  "I actually think we had some really bad teachers."   (First semester)  "I mean, I also think I've said this many times during our interviews,  that they are indeed very academically skilled teachers. It's just that  some of them are so academic that they also forget to be good at  conveying information. And that's probably because they primarily  prefer to be researchers rather than teachers. But they do know a lot  about what they're teaching."   (Fourth interview)  When Abi addresses the problematic issues she sees in her study  program, she is repeatedly told that it will get better in the next  semester, that it will then make sense e.g.:   “we were constantly told by  our tutor that this teacher is a bit special, but after the fall break, it will  get better.”   (First interview), but that is not her experience. Thus, the  consequences of a lack of alignment between expectations and  experiences described in the introduction referring to   Hovdhaugen  (2009) ,   apply not only to Abi before and after the start of her study, but  also during it. Abi is not comfortable leaving the gap between  expectations and experiences open, perhaps because she does not  believe that it will be possible to close the gap she is experiencing. Abi  finds it unsatisfactory that things do not   “make sense”   in the present:  "And that's what made me really dissatisfied in the first semester.  You must get a feel for everything but don't know what to grasp. And  then you sat there until January and had to do a week-long exam  and write an assignment, and maybe it was only then that you had  time to understand the theories you needed for the assignment."  (Second interview)  Abi does what she can to close the gap between expectations and  experiences and make sense of the theories herself. As part of this  sense-making, she decides that she wants to do an internship as part  of her education in the third semester. However, she cannot find any  information about it anywhere. She knocks down doors until she  succeeds in arranging an information meeting for herself and for  her classmates:  "There wasn't meant to be an info meeting, no. Which has come  about because I   could sense that there were many who were  interested in hearing about this internship. But it's a cumbersome  process, and it's something you have to be passionate about to get  through."   (Second interview)  As illustrated in the above quote, Abi constantly encounters  challenges, but as we saw earlier, she does not turn the problems  inwards to the same extent as Ingrid, she turns them outwards and  acts. All in all, Abi’s frustrations several times make her react and try  to change things in her program and classes. Other times, it makes her  sit quietly in class:  "I find it difficult to constantly... Well, this bad atmosphere that's  actually in the class about the teaching... You can't just complain  without doing something about it either. But it's also very unclear  what to do about it. So, I probably try to keep quiet sometimes."  (First interview)  As is obvious from the above quote, Abi cares about the atmosphere  in her class, however, she was not initially that socially invested in her  class, and she does not believe that her class’s social environment is that  good. However, Abi shares how she strategically chose her study group  partners. Particularly the girl, already mentioned, who came from a  completely different background than her.  "I had singled out her who I knew was really sharp in those,  you know, overarching academic things from uni, and then we also  found a third person."   (Fourth interview)  And a bit to her surprise, Abi ends up getting quite close with her  study group.   “The two I wrote the method project with, I’ve become quite  good friends with them.”   (Third interview). However, when it came to  her earlier dropout considerations, Abi used only her family,  boyfriend, and friends outside the university to discuss this:  "My boyfriend also listens to a lot. And one of his friends, who is  actually doing a Ph.D. [...] I've actually talked to him quite a bit  because he   says he   just loves studying and thinks it's great.  He really keeps saying that I should drop out. He thinks I should  drop it and that you shouldn't do something you're not happy  with. But I actually had a successful experience with this [latest]  exam. And it was really nice to get grades on that because I had  kind of set it as a goal, that if it didn't go well with that, then  I actually didn't understand at all what we were doing in this  study program, and then I shouldn't be here. But it went well."  (Second semester)  Hovdhaugen and Aamodt (2009)   describe how a (not always well-  founded) fear of not being able to fulfill academic standards, might  increase dropout considerations (like for Ingrid), however, for Abi the  positive experience of being able to fulfill requirements helped reduce  dropout considerations.

Page 11:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   11   frontiersin.org  During the second semester, Abi got the internship placement she  wanted, which helped things fall even more into place for her.   “The  whole second semester was actually also in the light of knowing that  I was going to intern in the third semester,”   and when asked about her  dropout considerations in the third semester, she responds:   “No no no,  we are finishing it now, unless it completely messes up in the master  thesis, of course.”   Abi did a so-called product-based master thesis.  Again, she struggled to find information on how such a thesis could  or should be constructed:  "And I can sense from my teachers that it's not because they have a  lot of experience with these product theses either. But I think maybe  it's up to me to figure out how to put it together."   (Third interview)  "However, in terms of my concern about figuring out what I can use  the program for, there must be something I can figure out because  I got an A for the thesis."   (Fourth interview)  It is a great success for Abi to overcome the challenges she has  been through. The reason for her expectancy-experience gap and  continuous challenges and dropout considerations not cumulating to  actual dropout, might be, that she, unlike Ingrid, attributes these  challenges outwards and thus, does not need to face challenging  personal transformation.  In the following, we present our third case student, Idhar. She too  is experiencing challenges and has dropout considerations. For Idhar  the challenges led her to change her study program.  Idhar  Idhar is a young woman, who is very motivated to continue  studying and to attend a university study after upper secondary  school. However, she has had a hard time figuring out what bachelor’s  program to choose:  "And my grades aren't very high, so I couldn't just apply to any  program that I had in mind. Before I even applied to any programs,  I wanted to study to become a social worker, even though it's not at  the university. Also, because it suits me more. But I couldn't because  of my grades. So, I   had to see what else I   was interested in."  (First interview)  After upper secondary school, she applied for different bachelor  programs, but did not get into her first choice:   “But then I was accepted  into another one, and I thought I would give it a chance because now  I had chosen it as my second priority”   (first interview). Idhar had  expectations for the educational content and level of this program and  when asked, she said that the academic level was very appropriate, but  that she did not like the teaching that much:  “[In a specific class], I think everyone there is about to fall asleep. It's  very heavy. It's like you get a million new terms thrown at you, and  you just have to learn it at that point when you're reading it [...] It's  more because you want to discuss because maybe you have some  other viewpoints. But I can't really do that because it's not the place  for it.”   (First interview)  Idhar experiences a gap between her expectations for and  experiences with   Tinto’s (1997)   category ‘Classroom activities’.  We wonder whether this classroom expectancy-experience gap was  what later resulted in Idhar’s change of study, as   Hovdhaugen (2009)  argues, that doubt reasoned in expectancy-experience misalignment  of the educational content, to a greater extent results in a change of  study than doubt reasoned in other conditions. In any case, Idhar has  had many dropout considerations right from the start of the program.  "But when I started, I felt a bit already on the first day that it wasn't  really for me after all. It just wasn't what I had expected. I don't  know how to explain it. But I just feel that it was very different from  what I had anticipated. So, I was actually quite disappointed. And  then I thought, 'okay, it's only the first day, you just have to give it a  chance.' And now I'm in the second semester, and I still feel the same  way."   (Second interview)  Even though Idhar from day one did not feel a match with her  current study program, she stayed in it for a while. This was for her  (like Abi) a question of not being a quitter:  "[I'm thinking] that I want to give it a chance. Because I don't want  to be someone who just drops out right away without giving it a  chance. You can't really judge it from one day or a few weeks. So,  I thought I just had to try to see how it would go. And if it doesn't  start to become more interesting over time. It could be that it just  seemed a bit dry at the beginning. But now I've concluded that I'll  probably switch to something else when I   get the chance."  (First semester)  The studies described in the introduction found that increasing or  cumulative dropout considerations might lead to reduced work  satisfaction, commitment, engagement, and stress ( Halbesleben and  Wheeler, 2008 ;   Allen et al., 2010 ). However, Idhar manages to accept  her position and it seems that something different than assumed from  these studies is happening. She keeps her learning motivation high,  despite her likewise high dropout considerations:  "Even if it's not interesting or something I'll need in the future, I feel  that all knowledge is good knowledge. Because then I know those  things. Because it may be that I'll need it at another time, or if  we need something similar in the new program. Then I already know  it. So, it's not like I've completely tuned out and just shown up and  sat and listened to nothing. Because many asked if I wasn't wasting  my time. But then I replied that I don't feel like I am because I'm still  learning something. Maybe it's not what I'll be studying in the  future, but I   can still use it in some way at some point."  (First interview)  Idhar feels that her current study does not fit her, and thus we also  here identify aspects of the need for inward or outward changes to  reach   a   match.   Idhar   does   not   engage   in   inward   personal  transformation, as we saw Ingrid did. She does not either work to  change the program to create a better match, as we saw Abi do. For  Idhar,   the   mismatch   increases,   which   increases   her   dropout  considerations but still does not lead to dropout. Idhar decided to stay  in the program for a full year until she could apply for and start the  new study program.   Hovdhaugen (2009)   suggests that expectancy-  experience gaps can lead to students changing programs. However,  Idhar’s decision to stay at the old program for a year is more difficult

Page 12:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   12   frontiersin.org  to explain. For Idhar, there might be a sociocultural reason behind  this. For a long time, she did not share with her parents that she  wanted to drop out and start a new study program, and when she did,  it took some time for her parents to understand her decision. From  her description of this, one gets the feeling that when Idhar emphasizes  her not being a quitter, it can be related to her parents’ concerns about  wasting time, getting into—what we   refer to as—a cumulative  trajectory toward dropping out, and not taking advantages of the  opportunities they did not have:  "And then my mom asked how it was going with my studies, and  I replied that it was fine, but that I still don't know if it's what  I want. And she had a little trouble understanding it because she  wondered why I had chosen it. Because parents are just like that, if  you choose something, then it's also the only thing you have to do for  the rest of your life."   (First interview)  “My sisters, they've been quite indifferent. I mean, they can't really  see the problem in changing program, but my mom had a bit of a  hard time understanding it because, for her, she felt like I had just  wasted a year on nothing. And also, because she thinks that since  I'm changing program now, I'll probably get tired of it at some point  and want to change again and stuff like that."   (Third interview)  "I think it's a general thing with Arab parents. Because, for example,  many who come to Denmark don't have such great chances of  getting an education and then maybe there have just been some  linguistic barriers and such. And then they just want you to achieve  what they didn't achieve."   (Fifth interview)  Idhar ends up changing to another program and she is initially  very happy about it. She excitedly talks about her new program, and  links her excitedness closely to aspects of the social system in   Tinto’s  (1975)   model:  "So, I'm very pleasantly surprised, but I also think that the social  aspect has a lot to do with it because, in the last couple of years of  lower secondary school and throughout upper secondary school,  I just haven't really been in any classes where I felt like I belonged.  Or where I fit in [...] There are a lot of people on this program who  are just like me."   (Third interview)  As she approaches the end of her bachelor’s degree, when she begins  to look forward to a master’s degree, she cannot imagine that it will be as  good socially in a subsequent master’s program, as it is in her current  bachelor’s program:   “I actually think it will be a little more difficult.”  (Eighth interview). Idhar also experiences that the good social  environment (and the small class size) influences the teaching of her  new program.  "I also think it plays a role, the relatively small size, it's very small so  we're not very many. So, it also provides an opportunity to talk to  everyone across the class.”   (Fourth interview)  Idhar is also very enthusiastic about the academic system (cf.  Tinto, 1975 ) in her new study program;  "And I don't really feel like I've had that, what can you say, that  eagerness or that enthusiasm for classes before. Or just for showing  up at all. So, I can definitely feel that it has made a really big  difference to go to a place that you're happy with and to have good  people around you whom you also talk to and can share your  frustrations with regarding the study and exams, and so on. So,  I just think that it's really important that you're satisfied with what  you're doing because it also affects everything else."   (Fifth  interview)  As she progresses further into the program, she experiences that  there is a big difference in the quality of the teaching she receives.  "So, basically, I really think it has been very varied, depending on  what semester you've been on, so, I would definitely say, well, that  there are some teachers who have been much more equipped for the  job than others."   (Eighth interview)  Her overall experience of the classes depends a lot on the  fluctuating teacher quality, and for Idhar,   Tinto’s (1997)   category of  classroom activities seems to be decisive for the development of  dropout considerations.  Thus, although Idhar was very enthusiastic about her new  program, with time her enthusiasm began to fade.  "The first year, and the first semester of the second year, I think, has  been the most exciting part of the study. We had some insanely good  classes there, and also some really sharp teachers, so yeah, well, then  I was convinced that this was the path I wanted to take because it  also paved the way for what I was considering in terms of career and  so on."   (Eighth interview)  "Because I had just lost the enthusiasm, these last two semesters  actually here on the bachelor's."   (Eighth interview)  Even though Idhar is starting to feel a bit weary of her program, it  is important for her to complete not just the bachelor’s degree but also  to pursue a master’s degree afterward.  "I really want to finish it. Otherwise, I'll have to listen to a lot of  annoying comments again [laughs]. No, well, initially, I really want  to complete my bachelor's, and then maybe I'll do something else  until I want to start on the master's."   (Fifth interview)  Idhar begins a master’s degree directly after her bachelor’s degree.  She does not explain why she does not end up ‘doing something else’  before matriculating a masters’ program. We wonder, again, if it for  Idhar is for sociocultural reasons. Anyhow, we will conclude her story,  with a general observation she makes about societal expectations  regarding education:  “For example, when you're in primary school or upper secondary  school and you're about to apply for tertiary education or talk about  it. I feel like society has this idea that if you choose a program,  you   should just finish it quickly, right after completing upper  secondary school. I think it's mainly because we're in such a hurry.  Even though I'm only 21 and about to start my second year at  university [...] Well, there's just no room for taking your time,  you know? The educational opportunities are abundant, so it's not  like you could ever fall behind. People are studying, even some in  their 40s who are still studying to complete upper secondary school.

Page 3:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   03   frontiersin.org  in a change of study than doubt reasoned in other conditions, which  led to dropout. However, the consequences may not be as one-sided as  one risks suggesting by linking them alone to conditioning factors and  results. Studies on apprentices who remain in their apprenticeship, find  that dropout considerations can undermine work satisfaction and  commitment ( Allen et   al., 2010 ), engagement ( Halbesleben and  Wheeler, 2008 ), and future performance ( Bakker and Costa, 2014 ), and  additionally associated with stress at work ( Allen et   al., 2010 ).  Furthermore, it is suggested that the dropout considerations reflect a  negative experience ( Eicher et al., 2014 ) which may accumulate over  time ( Hobfoll, 2011 ). Because of the complexity of the character and  possible consequences of dropout considerations, they are worth  examining in their own right, as also suggested by   Powers and  Watt (2021) .  In this article, we   investigate dropout considerations among  students in tertiary education programs in the humanities. Reasoned  in the findings described above, there are two major purposes to this  article: To understand (1) what characterizes students’ dropout  considerations and (2) if students’ dropout considerations accumulate  over time (cf.   Hobfoll, 2011 ). The research question is:  How do students’ dropout considerations take form and evolve  throughout tertiary education?  The research question will be answered focusing on different  identified evolvements in students’ dropout considerations. The  purpose of the article is not to reach general conclusions about the  origin or size of students’ dropout considerations, or to produce final  knowledge about which evolvements are most or least frequently  occurring, but to draw a varied picture of different possible  evolvements in students’ dropout considerations and point to possible  psychological and structural reasons for these evolvements.  Materials and methods  To answer the research question focusing on the characteristics  and evolvement of students’ dropout considerations, the article  builds on a mixed method design with longitudinal survey, register,  and interview data from tertiary Humanities students matriculating  in 2017–2019. Data was collected every half year as long as the  students were enrolled in the program. Our choice of design and  methods for the study is based on a belief that the longitudinal data  collection with the various methods provides the best basis for  investigating how students’ dropout considerations might take form  and evolve over time. When choosing a mixed method design,  Greene (2008)   accentuates the importance of having a strong inquiry  logic, which must be underpinned by coherence and connection  between the constituent parts (i.e., methods). In our case, the survey  provides knowledge about fluctuations in students’ self-reported  dropout considerations, while register data allows us to examine  whether these dropout considerations accumulate to actual dropout.  Interview data nuances our understanding of the fluctuations and of  how students’ explain   high   and   low   dropout   considerations,  respectively. However, how and if different parts (i.e., methods) fit  together must be determined not only based on the research interest,  but   also   in   the   epistemological   framework   of   the   study.  Epistemological paradigms offer logics of justification and frames of  inquiry for selecting and discussing methodologies and methods that  can help design and discuss how to best answer research questions  and explain and discuss the relevance of different methodologies and  methods ( Carter and Little, 2007 ;   Qvortrup and Lykkegaard, 2024b ).  The epistemology that has guided the choices of methodologies and  methods in this article relates to the thinking of dropout in Tinto’s  institutional departure model. The epistemological aspects of Tinto’s  institutional departure model have resulted in the chosen design,  which relates to the model being socio-psychologically rooted. We,  therefore, chose methods that gave us the possibility of examining  characteristics   and   fluctuations   of   the   students’   dropout  considerations, from both a focus on individual/psychological  perspectives and social mechanisms/structures. We chose to do this  by asking students in interviews to describe and explain individual  experiences or perceptions, referring to social structures, and by  looking at patterns in individual experiences or perceptions as these  are represented in students’ survey responses. We   visualize the  survey and register data by using Sankey diagrams, which identify  patterns across item responses and thus lead to identifiable paths.  We do not claim that this is the full breath of possible paths, but  we use these identified collective paths to detect themes that must  be explained by something other than the individual, psychological  perspective, namely social mechanisms or structures. By combining  interviews with register and survey data we get a ‘diversity of views’  and get the chance to ‘change perspective’ ( Greene et al., 1989 ;  Greene, 2007 ;   Bryman, 2016 ). Regarding the change in perspective,  we increase both the breadth and depth of our analyses of students’  dropout considerations by moving from patterns identified across  students to individual students’ experiences or perceptions. We thus  seek to expand and strengthen our interpretation and the validity of  the quantitative data by combining it with complementary interview  data. Our approach is, quantitatively variable-oriented (with a focus  on dropout consideration changes) and qualitatively case-oriented  (with   a   focus   on   students’   reasons   for   and   experiences   of  these changes).  The study employs data integration as participating students in the  qualitative part are a subsample of the quantitative participants.  Moreover, the study employs interpretation integration, as the  qualitative case student are analyzed and presented as narrative joint  displays referring to previous (quantitative and qualitative) presented  data and results.  Register and survey data  We collected longitudinal survey and register data from all  students in Humanities at the University of [anonymized for the sake  of review] matriculating in 2017–2019 ( N   =   2,781) half-yearly until  they were no longer enrolled (i.e., graduated or dropped out). Student  descriptives are presented in   Table 1 . Register data were collected with  exact dropout/completion dates and counted for the beginning and  middle of each semester. However, unless students who dropped out  actively contacted the university to let them know that they would not  proceed their studies, there was a delay in dropout dates, as  administrative dropout registration was not registered before students  missed obligatory classes or exams.  Register data on students’ study progress (i.e., enrolled, leave of  absence, graduated, or dropped out) were provided by the university

Page 4:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   04   frontiersin.org  along with mail addresses for all students. The survey was distributed  electronically to the students’ study mails halfway through each  semester and teachers were encouraged to set aside time in class for  students   to   fill   out   the   survey,   to   minimize   overall   dropout.  We acknowledge that students self-reported dropout considerations in  the middle of the semester might very possibly be different than dropout  considerations at the beginning and/or end of the semester. We thus, do  not perceive the dropout considerations that students indicate halfway  through one semester as a proxy for dropout considerations for the  entire semester. Instead, we perceive them as experiences situated in  time, which we can compare to situational experiences at other times  (halfway through previous and subsequent semesters). We do not  anticipate linear development between points in time.  The response rates varied from semester to semester from 58% in  the first semester to 15% in the sixth semester. The dramatic drop in  response rates might be due to the COVID-19 shutdown, where  students were home-taught and teachers thus were not able to set aside  time for the survey during (physical) classes.  In this article, we focus on a subset of four survey items (see  Table 2 ) related to students’ dropout considerations, answered using a  five-point Likert scale. Participants were provided the option to  respond “I do not know/I do not wish to answer” for all questions, and  these responses were treated as missing values in the analysis.  Explorative factor analysis  Data were transferred to SPSS and all statistical analyses were  conducted   in   SPSS   v.28   and   Excel.   Data   were   screened   for  impermissible values (no values were outside the 1–5 range) and  subsequently screened for missing data.  The dataset’s suitability for factor analysis was evaluated using  Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy (KMO   >   0.5) and  Bartlett’s test of sphericity. Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was used  to openly investigate the underlying factor structure. Since the  correlation test (using direct oblimin rotation) showed very small  correlations, orthogonal Varimax rotation was used. Kaiser’s criterion  (eigenvalues   ≥ 1) was used to determine the number of factors, and  items with loadings above 0.4 were included ( Rahn, 2014 ). The factor  reliability was tested with Cronbach’s Alpha (we use standardized   α ),  where   α   >   0.6 was chosen as accepted ( Ursachi et   al., 2015 ).  We performed the EFA for individual semesters (1–6) and found the  same one-factor structure each time, as indicated in   Table 2 .  Noticeably the fourth item does only load on the factor on two  semesters, and for each of these semesters the loadings are below the  cutoff value of 0.4 and additionally, the Cronbach’s Alpha value will  increase if this item is deleted. According to   Schönrock-Adema et al.  (2009) ,   a factor should contain at least three items with significant  loadings and items loading on the same factor should share the same  conceptual meaning. Based on this we continue our work with the  three-item dropout consideration factor.  A mean value for the accepted dropout consideration factor was  calculated for all students for all semesters.  Descriptive statistics and visualisation  Dropout considerations (values 1–5) were analytically divided  into three groups of low, medium, and high dropout considerations,  as represented in   Table 3 . For each semester, students who had  dropped out were given the value 0 (from the register data) and  likewise, students who had completed their studies were given the  value 6 (from the register data).  We quantified the share of students with low, medium, and high  dropout considerations, respectively, as well as the share of students who  had dropped out from or completed their program in each semester.  From the total population of 2,781 students, 141 students had  completed surveys for all semesters while they were still enrolled in  their program. We used Sankey diagrams to visualize these students’  fluctuations between low, medium, and high dropout considerations  TABLE 2   Item loadings and Cronbach’s alpha values for the dropout consideration factor for each semester.  Study intentions   Items   Loadings pr. semester  1   2   3   4   5   6  Dropout considerations  I have considered dropping out during the last six months.   0.815   0.731 *   0.792   0.844   0.863   0.898  I have during the last six months sometimes felt uncertain about  whether I should continue with this program.  0.986   0.960   1.004   1.022   0.981   0.898  I have during the last six months talked to friends and/or family about  possibly dropping out.  0.890   0.954   0.911   0.977   0.864   0.898  Persistence intentions   I expect to complete my program   0.343 *   –   –   0.330 *   –   –  Cronbach’s alpha   0.861   0.906   0.908   0.852   0.870   0.867  * (on loading)   =   Alpha increases if item is removed.  TABLE 1   Descriptive statistics for participating students ( N   = 2,781).  Descriptive statistics   Percentages  Educational level   Bachelor’s degree: 59.9%   Master’s degree: 40.1%  Gender   Male: 28.7%   Female: 71.3%  Homeland   Denmark: 88.3%   Other countries: 11.7%  Age at matriculation   20 or younger: 19.8%   Age 21–25: 57.5%   Age 26–30: 14.3%   31 or older: 5.8%

Page 5:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   05   frontiersin.org  and towards either dropout or completion across the data collection  points. Sankey diagrams are particularly suitable to illustrate flows and  have previously been proven appropriate to visualize educational  trajectories ( Sadler et al., 2012 ;   Lykkegaard and Ulriksen, 2019 ).  Finally, we quantified the total movements between adjacent  semesters from low, medium, and high dropout considerations  respectively,   and   towards   low,   medium,   and   high   dropout  considerations as well as towards actual dropout and completion.  Interviews  A sample of 14 students was selected from the first survey round  based on their belonging to the group of students with high dropout  considerations and because they had ticked off a box in the survey  permitting them to be contacted for follow-up interviews. We chose  students with initially high dropout considerations, as we wanted to  enhance the possibility that some of the interviewed students would  end up dropping out during our study ( Hobfoll, 2011 ). Students’  dropout considerations were longitudinally investigated by half-yearly  qualitative, semi-structured individual interviews throughout tertiary  education until they graduated, dropped out, or did not respond to  any more requests from the researchers. The first interview was  conducted at the students’ school, the following interviews were  conducted by phone while students were at home. In total 62  interviews were conducted, which each lasted between 10 and 50   min  (20   min on average). The first interviews were the longest. Each  interview was conducted by the first author and followed the thread  and theme from the previous interview regarding students’ study  experiences and accounts of their dropout considerations. All the  qualitative interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim.  For the present analysis, we selected three case students based on  maximum variation ( Flyvbjerg, 2004 ) with one case student who  completes her program, one student who drops out of her program,  and finally one student who changes to another program which  she completes.  Qualitative analysis  In the interview transcripts, the first author extracted the sections  where the students explicitly or implicitly referred to their dropout  considerations, and—true to Tinto’s Model—their experiences of the  social environment, the academic environment, and classroom  activities. From these extracts, the first author wrote three case stories.  The stories were then analyzed one by one by the second author (with  no prior knowledge of or relationship with the students) based on the  theoretical framework presented in the introduction focusing on the  three   students’   reasons   for   having   or   not   having   dropout  considerations, on the students’ forward/backward reasoning, on the  influence of administrative and academic requirements on dropout  considerations, and alignment between study expectations and  experiences. Finally, the first author, with her year-long relationship  with the students—validated these analyses, and we jointly wrote case  presentations,   illustrating   the   anonymized   students’   tertiary  educational stories and referring back to the quantitative data and  between the case students’ stories.  Results  Results are presented in two subsections. The first section presents  the fluctuations in the students’ dropout considerations over time  (quantitative), and the second presents the three case students’  individual (qualitative) dropout considerations stories and our  analysis hereof.  Fluctuations in dropout considerations  Table 4   illustrates that the share of students indicating to have low,  medium, and high dropout considerations remains stable across the  semester (63–71%, 9–15%, and 18–24% respectively). This stability is  TABLE 3   Categorisation and values assigned to register and survey data  outputs.  Assigned values  Register data   Dropout considerations (factor  mean)  Dropped out (value 0)  Enrolled  High dropout considerations (values: 1.00–2.35)  Medium dropout considerations (values: 2.35–3.65)  Low dropout considerations (values: 3.65–5.00)  Completed (value 6)  TABLE 4   Study progression and dropout consideration descriptives pr. semester.  Semester  1   2   3   4   5   6  Study progression status (register data)  Enrolled   2.754 (99%)   2.551 (92%)   2.409 (87%)   1.623 (58%)   1.477 (53%)   793 (29%)  Completed   0 (0%)   14 (1%)   22 (1%)   732 (26%)   821 (30%)   1.467 (53%)  Dropped out   27 (1%)   216 (8%)   350 (13%)   426 (15%)   483 (17%)   521 (19%)  Dropout consideration status (survey data)  Low dropout considerations   1.048 (66%)   534 (63%)   483 (68%)   237 (67%)   143 (65%)   82 (71%)  Medium dropout considerations   257 (16%)   114 (13%)   92 (13%)   39 (11%)   33 (15%)   11 (9%)  High dropout considerations   284 (18%)   204 (24%)   135 (19%)   79 (22%)   44 (20%)   23 (20%)

Page 7:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   07   frontiersin.org  enrolled (yellow), dropped out (red), or have completed their study  program (green). The focus students—who all had high dropout  consideration in the first semester—were interviewed half-yearly  (marked by X’es in the table) throughout tertiary education until they  graduated (8 students), dropped out (4 students), or did not respond  to requests from the researchers (white—2 students). Two students  quit their original study program and entered a new program. The  semester where they started a new program is marked by orange in  the   table.   The   three   selected   case   students   whose   individual  educational trajectories and dropout consideration stories will  be presented in the following are indicated in the table with blue  squares around. The case students are thus selected to illustrate a  student who dropped out of the study, a student who completed the  study, and a student who dropped out of the first study program and  started a second program.  Ingrid  Ingrid is a middle-aged woman, who has been working as a youth  care worker with vulnerable children for several years.  "Well, I   really loved my job, but the working conditions have  deteriorated so much that sometimes I can't even look myself in the  mirror and hardly stand behind what we do at work. So, I felt I had  to pull the plug. And I can't have any influence in the position I'm  in now. So, I had many considerations about if I wanted to have an  impact and make a difference, bring something else into the field of  work I have, primarily with neglected children, then I needed to  have different knowledge and a different title to put on it, to be able  to do something else."   (First interview)  Ingrid’s reason for starting her tertiary study (masters’ program)  can be understood with reference to the distinction we made in the  introduction between feelings referring backward (regrets) and  feelings referring forwards (opportunities). Ingrid justifies her choice  of study by referring backward (she loved her job but had to leave  because of the working conditions). However, the quote shows that  she is also influenced by forward-oriented feelings, as she sees future  opportunities (different knowledge and a different title). However, it  becomes clear that the forward-oriented feelings do not necessarily  have a clear direction, as she is unsure of what exactly she will use the  education for:   “I’ve been toying with the idea of doing something else for  the past three years. Not specifically what it should be, but I could feel  that I needed something different in terms of work.”   (First interview).  Her lengthy process of deciding to quit her job has resulted in great  motivation for her new tertiary education. The motivation is  furthermore based on already positive experiences with successfully  TABLE 5   Movements in dropout considerations and study progression between adjacent semesters.  Completion   Low dropout  considerations  Medium dropout  considerations  High dropout  considerations  Dropout  Low dropout considerations ( N   =   308)   9%   73%   8%   5%   6%  Medium dropout considerations ( N   =   104)   6%   18%   47%   9%   20%  High dropout considerations ( N   =   176)   5%   3%   3%   59%   30%  Share of students at one semester (left column) with, respectively, low (light green), medium (yellow), and high (orange) dropout considerations and their particular dropout consideration  (light green, yellow, orange), completion (green) or actual dropout (red) the following semester (adjacent columns). Note, as the 114 students answered the survey each semester as long as they  were still enrolled in their program, the total number is of adjacent semester movements are 588.  TABLE 6   Students’ individual educational trajectories.  Semesters  1.   2.   3.   4.   5.   6.   7.   8.   9.  Mona   X  Mae   X   X  Ingrid   X   X  Cathrine   X   X  Mahir   X   X   X  Abi   X   X   X   X  Carina   X   X   X   X  Sue   X   X   X   X   X  Lucy   X   X   X   X   X   X  Cathrine   X   X   X   X   X   X  Sarah   X   X   X   X   X  Maria   X   X   X   X   X   X  Yalina   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X  Idhar   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X  Yellow: Still enrolled. Green: Completed study program. Red: Dropped out. Orange: Dropped out and changed to a new study program. White: Researchers were not able to get in contact with  the student.  Xes denotes interview times. Blue squares highlight the three focus students.

Page 9:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   09   frontiersin.org  Ingrid therefore drops out. She says:  "It was very much about the content. And what can one say about  the teaching or the teachers, it has been very different [...] I think  I became unsure of those times when we had subjects where we had  multiple teachers. And where those teachers disagreed on how the  teaching should be."   (Second interview)  "I guess it was me who didn't really fit into it. And I had become too  old. And it was also nonsense that such an old woman like me  should engage in it. That's how you can quickly belittle yourself."  (Second interview)  Ingrid describes difficulties in figuring out and managing what she  was supposed to do. She, on the one hand, finds herself unfit for  studying.   On   the   other   hand,   she   still   finds   the   study  program interesting.  "Right now, I'm thinking that, for one thing, I really miss reading a  lot. I miss incredibly much this thing with the knowledge [...] And  it's incredibly interesting at the same time as it's also insanely  challenging. And I could feel that it had been many years since I had  been in a classroom. [...] I hope that I can find a solution and come  back to it [the study]. Because I really think it was really fantastic."  (Second interview)  Through the course of our study, Ingrid experienced many  fluctuations in her dropout considerations. It was by no means a  cumulative one-directional movement that made her dropout, it was  ups and downs, and in the end, she explains her dropout with a heavy  personal experience. However, we cannot help wondering, whether  this   experience   also   in   some   way   set   her   free   from   her  academic struggles.  Table 5   and   Figure 2   illustrated movements and fluctuations based  on our survey and register data, we saw how some students’ dropout  considerations followed a non-straightforward movement. Ingrid  illustrates,   such   non-straightforward   movements.   Her   story  additionally show that these movements can take place over rather  short time intervals. In the following, we present Abi’s story and the  movements in her dropout considerations.  Abi  Abi is a newly graduated journalist, and after spending 6 months  searching for jobs and feeling that she lacked some academic  knowledge   to   convey,   she   applied   for   a   two-year   master’s  degree program:  "I could sense that it was something I thought could be exciting. But  I just think that what happened quite quickly when I started the  program was, I didn't feel like it lived up to what was described  about it."   (First interview)  What Abi describes early on in her study, is an example of the lack  of alignment between expectations for and experiences of the  educational content in the study program, as described by   Hovdhaugen  (2009) . Abi justifies her expectancy-experience frustrations by the fact  that she was not familiar with the way of working at universities. This  issue is discussed by Abi throughout her studies:  “There are some things I notice because my education was so  practical   compared   to   those   who   are   used   to   studying   at  home.   You   read,   you   attend   lectures,   then   back   home.”  (First interview)  “And it also became very clear to me during the method project  because then I chose to ally myself with someone who was quite  academic and who came from the history study. And there were just  so many things that she knew as a matter of course about how things  should be structured, and so there were many of the things I had  written that she asked me to make more academic because I’m  brought up in a completely different way. Things should ideally be as  understandable as possible. Where sometimes it can seem like  almost the opposite is what you aim for in those assignments.”  (Third interview)  According   to   Hovdhaugen   (2009) ,   dropout   considerations  reasoned in expectancy-experience misalignment might lead to a  change of program (instead of dropout). For Abi, however, her  decisiveness, caused her to stay in the program.  “So, there’s also something in my upbringing, in that I would feel it  as a personal failure if I dropped out of something I had committed  to and started. In terms of my future, for example, I have a father  who really wants to further his education, he’s a vocational teacher,  and it’s really difficult for him to do anything because he doesn’t have  a higher education than that. There’s also something in that, that  regardless of whether I feel like I can use it for much right now,  I think it’s really nice to have that master’s degree with me. And  I also went into this education with the premise that it's just a year  in the classroom, and then I would have this internship in the third  semester, and then the master thesis for another half year, and that’s  it. So now I’m also so far along, so I think I’ll stick with it. If I get an  internship placement, that is, I’ve been applying a bit now.”  (First interview)  Here we see, just like with Ingrid, that the way Abi handles her  dropout considerations is based on feelings referring backward, both  to her own experiences of not being allowed to fail, but also to  experiences from her father’s lack of success. However, she also briefly  mentions some forward-oriented feelings with the wording that it’s  nice to have that master’s degree with me. But to realize the  opportunities described as part of the forward-oriented feelings, there  is a hard battle to be fought. Fortunately, Abi has a genuine interest in  the field:  “But somehow, what’s at the core of the study, that is still what I find  interesting.”   (First interview)  However, her decisiveness and interest does not stop her from  momentarily being filled with dropout considerations:  "But here in January, for example, when we had this week-long  exam, and when I otherwise had time off, I was looking at job  postings a lot. Because it takes something to hold onto someone like  me, because I know that I have an education that I could just go out  and use for something. In principle, I could just go out and enter the  job market now."   (Second interview)

Page 13:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   13   frontiersin.org  So, it's never too late. I just think it's a general mentality we have.”  (Fifth interview)  Idhar experiences a lack of harmony between what for her is a  dominating idea in society, namely that educational trajectories must  proceed linearly and pacey through unproblematic transitions, and  her desire to take her time to engage in and reconsider her studies.  Idhar’s concluding remark is an excellent starting point for summing  up   the   article’s   interest   in   understanding   students’   dropout  considerations   and   whether they contribute to developing   or  challenging young people’s educational self-images.  Limitations  The presented findings rely on students’ self-reported dropout  considerations, collected through surveys and interviews, and relates  these to actual dropout and study completion data from institutional  register data. While self-reported data is essential for understanding  individual dropout considerations, it inherently introduces the possibility  of social desirability bias. We   thus acknowledge that the students  interviewed may not have disclosed all the reasons for their dropout  considerations. However, we hope that our prolonged engagement with  the students helped mitigate some initial social desirability bias, enhancing  the credibility of the data as suggested by   Lincoln and Guba (1985) .  Our   study   aimed   to   investigate   how   students’   dropout  considerations   fluctuate   over   time   and   to   point   to   possible  psychological and structural reasons for these evolvements, rather  than provide generalizable conclusions about the prevalence or origins  of these considerations. This aim affects the generalizability of the  article’s results, as findings are situational and may differ if conducted  in a different context. For example, it may influence Danish students’  dropout considerations significantly that they receive public support  (SU) for tertiary education regardless of social standing, which is not  necessarily the case in other countries. Additionally, both the  demographic composition of our sample, i.e., the share of minority  students (see   Table 1 ), and the mix of bachelor’s and master’s students,  could impact the results. As the purpose of the article was to draw a  varied picture of different possible evolutions in students’ dropout  considerations and point to possible psychological and structural  reasons for these evolutions, we found it relevant to include a variety  of student types. However, it is important to note that the selected  students may not represent the full spectrum of student experiences  and dropout consideration fluctuations. Adding to this, we might also  have arrived at a different understanding of dropout considerations, if  we   had not chosen solely students with initially high dropout  considerations for the qualitative part of our study. Finally, the timing  of our surveys—conducted halfway through the semester—may have  influenced the findings, and different results might have emerged if  we had surveyed students at the start or end of the semester. In sum,  our study has several contextual limitations, and we encourage future  research to validate, extend, or challenge our findings in other contexts.  Discussion  When focusing on the entire student group, we find that there is  a stable share of students with low, medium, and high dropout  considerations throughout time. In that sense, it could be explained  with the suggestion of   Herrmann et   al. (2015) ,   that doubt is a  faithful—thus stable—study companion. However, although we find  stable shares of low, medium, and high dropout considerations,  we also find that this is not an expression of stability in the individual  student’s dropout considerations, nor does it mean that students’  dropout considerations accumulate linearly over time. Both the  quantitative and qualitative studies make clear that there are significant  fluctuations in some students’ dropout considerations. Based on this,  the study confirms both the article’s hypothesis that dropout  considerations are malleable and the relevance of   Tinto’s (1975)  suggestion to include time as an interacting variable when it comes to  understanding student development in relation to dropout and  persistence, respectively.  Our detected dropout considerations fluctuations challenge  Hobfoll’s (2011)   suggestion that students’ dropout considerations  accumulate over time. Although there seem to be   primary  movements from high dropout considerations towards dropout,  and from low dropout considerations towards completion, there  are also considerable secondary movements (i.e., from high  dropout considerations to completion). Instead of a cumulative  development, it is rather the case that the individual student’s  dropout considerations change repeatedly in interaction with the  students’ previous experiences, expectations for the future as  well   as   changes   in   the   student’s   academic   and   personal  circumstances.  Like   Hovdhaugen and Aamodt (2009)   we find a relationship  between uncertainty regarding the ability to meet administrative and  academic requirements and dropout considerations. Conversely,  we also find that considerations about dropping out may be fueled by  students’ feelings of not being sufficiently challenged academically.  The reason for experiencing academic shortcomings can thus  be linked both internally to the students themselves and externally to  the academic program. Furthermore, to the academic requirements,  we add personal requirements as drivers of dropout considerations.  We find personal requirements linked to dropout considerations in  both the form of financial requirements and family care (which are  linked to the student’s resources, costs, and values). For both academic  and personal requirements, we find that the challenges are often about  a lack of alignment between expectations and experiences, as  described by   Hovdhaugen (2009) .  We   suggest   that   the   gaps   between   expectancies   and  experiences could be explained by how well students and the study  programs’ norms and values go along (i.e., academic language as  a norm, valuing that teaching must make sense in the moment,  describing oneself as not being a quitter, etc.). This is what   Eccles  et al. (1997)   describe as a person-environment fit. From previous  studies of educational person-environment fits, we know that a  lack of fit can affect students’ well-being, motivation, interest,  behavior, academic performance, and future job opportunities  ( Eccles et al., 1997 ;   Tuominen-Soini et al., 2012 ;   Holmegaard  et al., 2014 ;   OECD, 2022 ). Thus, the outward or inward changes  to improve person-environment fit, which we see some students  in our study engage in, might be   a profitable strategy. It is  interesting that we not only find that dropout considerations can  be nurtured by negative experiences, as suggested   Hovdhaugen  and   Aamodt   (2009) ,   but   can   also   be   reduced   by   positive  experiences.

Page 14:
Lykkegaard and Qvortrup   10.3389/feduc.2024.1399714  Frontiers in   Education   14   frontiersin.org  Data availability statement  The datasets presented in this article are not readily available for  privacy reasons. Requests to access the datasets should be directed to  the corresponding author.  Ethics statement  Ethical review and approval was not required for the study on  human participants in accordance with the local legislation and  institutional requirements. The studies were conducted in accordance  with   the   local   legislation   and   institutional   requirements.   The  participants provided their written informed consent to participate in  this study.  Author contributions  EL:   Conceptualization,   Data   curation,   Formal   analysis,  Investigation,   Methodology,   Project   administration,   Resources,  Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &  editing. AQ: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis,  Investigation,   Methodology,   Project   administration,   Resources,  Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &  editing.  Funding  The author(s) declare that no financial support was received for  the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.  Conflict of interest  The authors declare that the research was conducted in the  absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could  be construed as a potential conflict of interest.  Publisher’s note  All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors  and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations,  or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product  that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its  manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.  References  Aljohani, O. (2016). A comprehensive review of the major studies and theoretical  models of student retention in higher education.   High. Educ. Stud.   6, 1–18. doi:   10.5539/  hes.v6n2p1  Allen, D. G., Bryant, P. C., and Vardaman, J. M. (2010). Retaining talent: replacing  misconceptions with evidence-based strategies.   Acad. Manag. Perspect.   24, 48–64. doi:  10.5465/AMP.2010.51827775  Astin, A. (1984). Student involvement: A development theory for higher educations  graduate school of educations. Los Angeles, CA: University of California.  Bakker, A. B., and Costa, P. L. (2014). Chronic job burnout and daily functioning: a  theoretical analysis.   Burn. Res.   1, 112–119. doi:   10.1016/j.burn.2014.04.003  Bean, J. P. (1983). The application of a model of turnover in work organizations  to the student attrition process.   Rev. High. Educ.   6, 129–148. doi:   10.1353/  rhe.1983.0026  Bean, J. P., and Eaton, S. B. (2002). “A psychological model of college student retention”  in Reworking the student departure puzzle, vol. 1. ed. J. M. Braxton (Nashville, TN:  Vanderbilt University Press), 48–61.  Bean, J. P., and Metzner, B. S. (1985). A conceptual model of nontraditional  undergraduate   student   attrition.   Rev.   Educ.   Res.   55,   485–540.   doi:   10.3102/  00346543055004485  Braxton, J., and Hirschy, A. S. (2004). “Reconceptualizing antecedents of social  integration in student departure” in Retention and student success in higher education.  eds. I. M. Yorke and B. Longden (Maidenhead, Berkshire, England: McGraw-Hill  Education (UK)), 89–103.  Bryman, A. (2016). Social research methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  Carter, S. M., and Little, M. (2007). Justifying knowledge, justifying method, taking  action: epistemologies, methodologies, and methods in qualitative research.   Qual.  Health Res.   17, 1316–1328. doi:   10.1177/1049732307306927  Common Worlds Research Collective. (2020). Learning to become with the world.  Education for future survival.  Eaton, S. B., and Bean, J. P. (1995). An approach/avoidance behavioral model of college  student attrition.   Res. High. Educ.   36, 617–645. doi:   10.1007/BF02208248  Eccles, J. S., Midgley, C., Wigfield, A., Buchanan, C. M., Reuman, D., Flanagan, C.,  et al. (1997). Development during adolescence: The impact of stage–environment fit on  young adolescents' experiences in schools and in families (1993).   Adolescents and Their  Families   74–85.  Eicher, V., Staerklé, C., and Clémence, A. (2014). I want to quit education: a  longitudinal study of stress and optimism as predictors of school dropout intention.   J.  Adolesc.   37, 1021–1030. doi:   10.1016/j.adolescence.2014.07.007  Flyvbjerg, B. (2004). Five misunderstandings about case-study research.   Sosiologisk  tidsskrift   12, 117–142. doi:   10.18261/ISSN1504-2928-2004-02-02  Gore, P., and Metz, A. J. (2017). “First year experience programs, promoting successful  student transition” in Encyclopedia of international higher education systems and  institutions. eds. J. C. Shin and P. Teixeira (Netherlands: Springer), 1–6.  Greene, J. C. (2007). Mixed methods in social inquiry (vol 9). San Fransisco: John  Wiley & Sons.  Greene, J. C. (2008). Is mixed methods social inquiry a distinctive methodology?   J.  Mixed Methods Res.   2, 7–22. doi:   10.1177/1558689807309969  Greene, J. C., Caracelli, V. J., and Graham, W. F. (1989). Toward a conceptual  framework for mixed-method evaluation designs.   Educ. Eval. Policy Anal.   11, 255–274.  doi:   10.3102/01623737011003255  Halbesleben, J. R., and Wheeler, A. R. (2008). The relative roles of engagement and  embeddedness in predicting job performance and intention to leave.   Work Stress   22,  242–256. doi:   10.1080/02678370802383962  Herrmann, K. J., Troelsen, R., and Bager-Elsborg, A. (2015). Med tvivlen som  følgesvend: En analyse af omfang af og kilder til studietvivl blandt studerende.   Dansk  Universitetspædagogisk Tidsskrift   10, 56–71. doi:   10.7146/dut.v10i19.20738  Hobfoll, S. E. (2011). “Conservation of resources theory: its implication for stress,  health, and resilience” in The Oxford handbook of stress, health, and coping. ed. S.  Folkman, vol.   127   (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 147.  Holmegaard, H. T., Madsen, L. M., and Ulriksen, L. (2014). A journey of negotiation  and belonging: understanding students’ transitions to science and engineering in higher  education.   Cult. Stud. Sci. Educ.   9, 755–786. doi:   10.1007/s11422-013-9542-3  Hovdhaugen, E. (2009). Transfer and dropout: different forms of student departure in  Norway.   Stud. High. Educ.   34, 1–17. doi:   10.1080/03075070802457009  Hovdhaugen, E., and Aamodt, P. O. (2009). Learning environment: relevant or not to  students'   decision   to   leave   university?   Qual.   High.   Educ.   15,   177–189.   doi:  10.1080/13538320902995808  Lincoln, Y. S., and Guba, E. G. (1985).   Naturalistic inquiry . Sage.  Lykkegaard, E., and Ulriksen, L. (2019). In and out of the STEM pipeline–a  longitudinal study of a misleading metaphor.   Int. J. Sci. Educ.   41, 1600–1625. doi:  10.1080/09500693.2019.1622054  OECD (2022). Managing student transitions into upper secondary pathways. Paris:  OECD.  Qvortrup, A., and Lykkegaard, E. (2024a) The malleability of higher education study  environment factors and their influence on humanities students’ dropout – validating  an instrument, Education Sciences. (in review).

