Page 8:
8 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  3.1   |   Elements affecting the adaptation of students during their first year of study  The following is a description of important changes that may have occurred since starting university and which in some way could have influenced the interviewees' unsuccessful academic trajectory.  The positive aspects cited by the participants point mainly to the climate experienced with the group- class.  They also highlight group cohesion with the aim of achieving academic goals and actions related to the lending of notes and help in studying; they positively point out the atmosphere generated in the classroom. I was lucky too; we were a good group. In the History degree course, as you will understand, there  weren't 160 of us, there were, I think it ended up with about 70 of us in the first year. And then  we kind of helped each other out as the course progressed. So, in that aspect, things got better, because we all got together and we overlapped each other's notes and we helped each other a little bit more.  (Participant 8.ULL)  Other highlights of the university experience refer to the methodology used by the teaching staff and the comple - mentary training offered. A former student of the UNIZAR Law Degree commented that when he was a student, he found it striking that credits were offered for participation in other activities of a non- educational nature, such as sports (Participant 21.UZ). As for the methodology applied by the teaching staff, the active methodology of the  internships in the subjects and their relationship with professional development were positively valued. Two people  from the UHU, from the Degree in Computer Engineering and the Degree in Cultural Management, positively high -  lighted the availability of the teaching staff and the flexibility with regard to the personal conditions of the students (Participant 32.UHU; Participant 33.UHU). The most unfavourable aspects of the university experience would be related to the abrupt change from  post- secondary studies (or vocational training) to university. Interviewees mentioned the existence of ob -  vious differences in teaching and pedagogical methodologies (greater student autonomy at university), the high number of students in the same classroom, the feeling of impersonality in learning and the high level of absenteeism. What surprised me the most about the university is the radical change from secondary school to university, in other words, and I understand that this is due to the number of students [...] there was too radical a change between going from secondary school, where you have a teacher who tries to teach you and who explains, to university, where what they do is give you some general ideas and you do what you can to get by. (Participant 11.ULL)  It was a very different system of organisation and studies compared to post- secondary. For me it was quite a big leap, because you had to be more constant, they didn't give you everything as spoon- fed as at school; you had to put your head to work more, both for taking notes in class, and  then studying them, and for the books [...].  (Participant 27.UZ)  Infrastructure is another aspect that was highlighted negatively. In this case, reference was made to the deterioration of the buildings, the obsolescence of materials and poor environmental conditions, such as poor acoustics and dimly lit  classrooms. (Participant 4.ULL; Participant 7.ULL; Participant 17.UZ), mostly cited by people who studied at the ULL.  With regard to teachers, although some participants pointed out positive aspects, it was also negatively rated that, for the most part, teachers were inflexible in the face of change, with low empathy, lack of involvement and 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 9:
|   9 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  inaccessibility (Participant 4.ULL; Participant 9.ULL; Participant 12.ULL; Participant 15.UHU; Participant 17.UZ; Participant 31.UZ). Several participants from the three universities reported experiencing situations in the class-  room where teachers were disrespectful to students (Participant 15.UHU).  Another aspect that was negatively evaluated was the academic timetable of the degree courses, which were  considered excessively long and/or split. This was one of the lowest rated aspects of the university experience  (Participant 27.UZ). In another case, it was noted that starting university studies meant sacrificing their personal and social life in order to meet the demand for university education (Participant 29.UZ).  The important changes that affected the university academic career would be mainly related to the adaptation  from their experience in post- secondary studies, in particular those that have to do with the learning methodology  and responsibility for their own results. The expository methodology used by the university teaching staff means that the students are responsible for taking notes, creating their own materials and, in short, being able to grasp  the relevant information of the contents of the subjects, while in post- secondary, a logocentric model is followed,  where the teachers select, elaborate and present the contents in an expository manner (Participant 32.UHU;  Participant 30.UZ; Participant 26.UZ; Participant 15.UHU).  Some aspects pointed out that are related to methodology include the assessment system, perceived as a “test” fraught with uncertainty due to a lack of knowledge of the relationship between the demand for demon -  stration of learning and the notes or materials produced by the students themselves (Participant 15.UHU). Other  ratings related to evaluation methods are associated with the extent of tests (Participant 27.UZ) and their stan-  dardisation:   [...] of the assessment system at the University that changed with respect to post- secondary studies in that sense that you remember many of those multiple- choice tests, I saw that the obsession with memorising and regurgitat- ing work continued   (Participant 33.UHU). Elements such as moving house, sharing a flat with other students and adapting to another group of people in order to form friendships were cited as important changes, although not decisive, when it comes to drop - ping out of university (Participant 21.UZ; Participant 20.UZ; Participant 17.UZ; Participant 14.ULL). These  changes affected emotional and social wellbeing more than strictly academic ones. Other changes reported in academic trajectory were related to family problems (Participant 3. ULL), going through difficult times in  life coming from a broken family (Participant 2.UZ; Participant 2.UZ) and separation from parents (Participant  32.UHU). In this way, family and personal instability influence the decision to drop out, providing an immediate  solution to the emotional discomfort and leaving aside academic stability and future consequences:   If I had tried to insist to my father, I could have continued my studies at home for another year, but as I also wanted to be- come independent and get away from the bad atmosphere at home, I decided to look for a job   (Participant 16.UHU). Two people pointed to financial stability as an important factor in their decision to drop out of school. The loss of employment was, for one of them, the main reason for dropping out, as it led to the impossibility of paying for her studies (Participant 9.ULL). In another case, moving to another city (island), sharing a flat with other students and the need to find a job to support herself conditioned her continuation at the university (Participant 11.ULL).  3.2   |   Difficulties encountered in adapting to university studies  The difficulties encountered in accessing academic studies at university can be grouped into three dimensions. The first has to do with personal difficulties, the second refers to those derived from the university itself and, finally, the third refers to relationships, whether due to feelings of loneliness, difficulties in relationships or es -  trangement in family relationships or friendships. This grouping emerges from the responses obtained. Firstly, the answers were oriented towards a difficult emotional situation and complicated by the feeling of unhappiness (Participant 1.ULL), anxiety produced by the academic workload linked to work performance  (Participant 7.ULL) and in other cases by demotivation, without explaining the causes. 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 10:
10 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  [...] I made friends very quickly; I liked going to class; in engineering, I've always been very good at  mathematics, so I didn't have any major setbacks [...] but I started to get discouraged, no more... I said bah, this is not my thing. So that's when I started to say, I'm going to go the other way because  I'm not comfortable here, but it wasn't a question of difficulty in studying or anything like that.  (Participant 14.ULL) In other cases, family problems made it difficult for students to adapt to university. Some reported not feeling sup -  ported by their families and having financial difficulties, which meant that they depended on scholarships to con - tinue their studies (Participant 2.ULL; Participant 8.ULL; Participant 16.UHU; Participant 21.UZ; Participant 23.UZ).  Economic problems also led to the need to combine studies with a job, making it hard to stay at university and forcing  critical decisions to be made between academic training and working life (Participant 16.UHU; Participant 24.UZ; Participant 27.UZ).  Other drawbacks found in the adaptation to university were motivated by the lack of knowledge of the degree itself and the problems of adaptation with respect to secondary/high school, as well as the great differences found in the teaching methodology (Participant 12.ULL; Participant 5.ULL) and the lack of study habits in the previous stages. One of the cases refers to the lack of knowledge of many of the concepts dealt with in a Health Sciences  Degree, due to not having completed post- secondary studies and having gained access through a Higher Cycle (Participant 25.UZ). [...] I left secondary school and the truth is that my study habits were non- existent, I mean, if I at- tended class I would just pass, you know? And the change from post- secondary to university is quite a big one. Everything is quite different. The teaching staff are very different as well. In other words,  the context changes dramatically, you know? So, I was a little bit out of place.  (Participant 7.ULL)  In terms of personal and social wellbeing, some people stated that loneliness was the source of the difficulties per -  ceived at the start of the academic trajectory, although to a lesser extent than the previous ones, having its ori -  gin in the change of residence (Participant 12.ULL; Participant 16.UHU) and the change of friendships (Participant 12.ULL; Participant 16.UHU). Finally, in other cases, no problematic situations that could be the cause of university  dropout were noted (Participant 10.ULL; Participant 11.ULL; Participant 20.UZ; Participant 21.UZ; Participant 22.UZ; Participant 24.UZ; Participant 27.UZ; Participant 34.ULL).  This dimension, linked to the difficulties encountered after leaving university, describes the personal frustra -  tion that students experience at this point in their lives:   Well, like you say, at that moment in my life it was a very big blow, from which it was difficult for me to recover because I saw it as an absolute failure   (Participant 17.UZ). And in this  same aspect, frustration due to the social image that transcends abandonment and that has to do with the reflec - tion that others have of people and that conditions self- perception and self- esteem:   I get a little embarrassed when the subject comes up and people asked me what I studied, that's all I can say . (Participant 26.UZ). These personal hardships are also compounded by work-  related difficulties, which people become aware of  after some time has passed:  Maybe my job opportunities will be a bit reduced and the knowledge, I mean, I like to know, I  mean, I like knowledge. So, I think that I've missed out on a lot, a lot of knowledge and future job opportunities.  (Participant 18.UZ) 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 11:
|   11 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  3.3   |   Factors influencing university dropout rates  This section describes which elements of motivation affected participants' decisions to encourage them to drop out. It also examines the degree of satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the university and, specifically, how poor academic results led to the decision to drop out of university. The intrinsic motivation of students during their university experience is mainly found in the fulfilment of the expectations of access to university:   We could say that what motivated me was that I got a place in biology and I wanted to be a biologist, and if I wanted to be a biologist I had to continue   (Participant 1.ULL). In this sense, those  who managed to enrol in their first- choice degree course said they felt motivated enough to avoid dropping out (Participant 2.ULL; Participant 24.UZ; Participant 25.UZ), even if in the future they might realise that they had made the wrong decision (Participant 28.UZ). Other aspects with an impact on intrinsic motivation include not  giving up or abandoning what is being started (Participant 3.ULL) and avoiding generating a feeling of failure  (Participant 30.UZ). It was expressed that future social and professional projection was an element of inspiration to improve living conditions, i.e. university studies were related to better professional and, consequently, eco- nomic and social prospects (Participant 18.UZ; Participant 27.UZ; Participant 29.UZ).  I was motivated, I was always eager, I always had a lot of energy, but I could feel that I lacked a lot of foundation. I went to private classes and I saw that in the subjects I failed, that is, I did fail, but I looked at what I had been able to do and I said ‘Hey, I failed, but I've learned a lot for next year, I'll  get it!’ And I was looking to the future with perspective, when I was failing, I was thinking: Okay,  I need to get a job in order to save, because I know this is going to cost me, but I'm going to pass! (Participant 16.UHU)  In other cases, the unfounded value of learning was the main reason they went to university (Participant 23.UZ; Participant 25.UZ; Participant 24.UZ; Participant 33.UHU; Participant 19.UHU). Companionship, relationships and  collaboration with peers were influential factors in motivation throughout the academic trajectory at the three uni - versities (Participant 5.ULL; Participant 8.ULL; Participant 16.UHU; Participant 20.UZ; Participant 31.UHU). In con-  trast to the difficulties cited, some people highlighted that the teachers were an important source of motivation for them due to their sensitivity, professionalism and empathy. This teacher used to explain things very clearly. It's always true that if she saw you with a blank look on your face, that she knew you weren't understanding what she was explaining, she would ask “What don't you understand?” despite having over a hundred of us in the class. Well, let's see, a  hundred and something were enrolled. There could have been 60, maybe 70 students in the class,  but even so, she was still asking each of them. I don't know, she was one of the few who did make the effort to see whether we had all understood what she was explaining or not. (Participant 5.ULL) Family environments and friendships are key influences on the motivation of university students and their progress at  university (Participant 14.ULL). Some of the respondents never found anything to motivate them (Participant 26.UZ;  Participant 15.UHU). The opinions regarding satisfaction with the university experience are more represented by positive percep -  tions ( n   =   17), as opposed to negative ones ( n   =   8). There are people who did not feel particularly satisfied or dis-  satisfied ( n   =   8), pointing out which aspects were more satisfactory versus less satisfactory. 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 12:
12 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  [...] but there are subjects, for example, that I felt very good about —I was very comfortable taking those subjects— and other subjects that I didn't like at all, due to the syllabus, obviously, and be -  cause of the teacher too, because it seems like you're going to a class of I don't know what....  (Participant 30.UZ)  The positive evaluations proffered are related to the degree itself, the teaching staff and the relationships with class -  mates, but also to the opportunities that the time spent at the university has provided once this stage has passed. University was a new opportunity for me, how to leave a bit of the past behind and to open up to a  new future. And the truth is that it really helped me to create new social networks, to broaden my  expectation of what a person, a friend, could give you.  (Participant 21.UZ)  In some cases, dissatisfaction with higher education studies was associated with their own personal assessments, which justified the decision to drop out of university studies permanently, at least until the time of the research  (Participant 22.UZ; Participant 23.UZ).  Regarding the academic outcomes achieved during the university experience, the marks were negative  from the start of the academic year (Participant 7.ULL; Participant 15.UHU; Participant 17.UZ; Participant 19.UZ; Participant 22.UZ; Participant 26.UZ; Participant 28.UZ; Participant 30.UZ). In other cases, however, they worsened as the course(s) progressed (Participant 18.ULL; Participant 21.UZ; Participant 24.UZ). Work  responsibilities and balancing studies and work were the main causes of low performance or poor marks  (Participant 28.UZ).  Yes, it was a little bit lower than what I was used to getting, but that's why, because it was more difficult to achieve that mark, it's more complicated. (Participant 12.ULL) In terms of the comparison of the academic results that the participants obtained in high school and at university, the  low performance at university generated a lot of frustration (Participant 26.UZ). To a lesser extent, it was stated that  academic performance had been good or very good, being reasons or causes of low weight in the construction of  the idea of dropping out (Participant 31.ULL; Participant 33.UHU; Participant 34.ULL; Participant 20.UZ; Participant  12.ULL; Participant 9.ULL; Participant 4.ULL).  4   |   D I S CU S S I O N  In recent times, numerous studies have addressed the problem of dropout using qualitative methods, with  the aim of accessing information that is more focused on personal nuances in order to provide a more  comprehensive view of this phenomenon. The study by Zamudio et   al.   ( 2019) analysed the responses of a sample of 524 students, with the aim of defining the causes of school failure in relation to three fundamental  criteria: the economic dimension, academic consequences and the lack of support resulting from unequal educational and employment opportunities. Likewise, following a qualitative approach, Romero Sánchez and Hernández Pedreño   ( 2019) investigated the diversity of causes that led to school dropout by applying three  qualitative techniques: life stories, professional interviews and focus groups. Among the conclusions of their study and in relation to the method, they highlighted that the life history technique proved adequate for  investigating endogenous causes of school dropout, while interviews worked well for investigating data on exogenous causes (institutional or structural). 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 14:
14 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  those who are defeated by the system and its practices, those who feel they have not met the standards, those who have not been sufficiently supported by the system to overcome the bumps that appear along the learning pathways, those who need more time, those who need different support to achieve the objectives, those who find it difficult to advance because they do not have the same resources as the others, all of these probably feel responsible for their own failure.  5   |   CO N C LU S I O N S  The aim of this work was to study in depth the educational trajectories of students who had decided to take a university degree and who, due to various circumstances, had to drop out. This analysis was approached from a  qualitative perspective, as it was considered an appropriate strategy to delve deeper into the factors and reasons  that led participants to drop out of education. The results of the study shed light on a complex reality experienced by students entering university studies, who are surrounded by a multitude of factors that, in many cases, are very difficult to reconcile. The loneliness and worry that accompany the arrival and start of university studies is an insurmountable process for many. For this reason, the need to introduce changes, based on institutional responsibility, to try to reduce the effect of these variables, which are at the root of dropout, was insisted upon. Dropout must be understood as a painful problem  in the lives of students who fail, which affects their self- esteem and the construction of their own life plans. It is  a problem that reaches very high numbers and should therefore be a matter of priority concern for governments.  Measures such as thoroughly preparing the transition processes between stages, improving information on  university studies, improving coordination and collaboration between stages, preparing teachers who have to deal  with first- year students and improving guidance, tutoring and mentoring systems for students from the moment  they enter higher education. But not only reactive tutorials (after the assessment for recovery) but proactive  tutorials, which allow problems to be anticipated, formative, facilitating and follow- up tutorials, which generate  closeness and support so that the student feels accompanied from the moment students enter the university.  Tutorials that awaken motivation, involvement, progress and dynamisation in learning. All of this can undoubtedly  help students to integrate and build their educational projects, thus preventing them from falling into the trap of failure and dropout. If we had to highlight the limitations of the research, we would undoubtedly refer to the difficulties of ac - cessing the participants. As these are people who left university several years ago, contact and willingness to  participate in studies of this nature is very difficult, as it involves evoking unsatisfactory life events that happened a long time ago. However, we also have to appreciate the willingness and involvement of the people who took part. For the future, it would be interesting to assess the use of other data collection methodologies (life sto -  ries, focus groups, etc.), which could be applied in combination with interviews and could help to enhance the  predictive value of the data. And as part of future possibilities, it could be interesting to carry out longitudinal  studies to monitor the problem of dropout (when and why it occurs) as well as the people who drop out, in order  to assess how they reconstruct their life trajectories and their life projects after leaving university. As for the  results obtained, they should be a reference of interest when designing guidance systems and programmes for  students, both at the pre- university and university level, aimed at facilitating the adaptation of students and the  development of their training and professional projects. The information obtained can undoubtedly contribute to improving the problems faced by pupils who drop out. Specific measures such as preparing students to make good decisions about the studies they want to take, enhancing their knowledge of the degree courses to prevent them from feeling out of place later on, informing them about how to work at the university so that they can later integrate smoothly, giving them more personalised attention in the first steps of their university career, making 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 19:
|   19 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  A N N E X  F I G U R E A 1   Academic trajectory. Categories, codes and quotes. 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 20:
20 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  F I G U R E A 2   University dropout. Categories, codes and quotes. 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 1:
Eur J Educ.   2024;59:e12650.   |   1 of 20  https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12650  wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/ejed  Received: 11 December 2023   |   Revised: 18 March 2024   |   Accepted: 20 March 2024  DOI: 10.1111/ejed.12650  O R I G I N A L   A R T I C L E The process of adaptation to higher education studies and its relation to academic dropout Yaritza   Garcés- Delgado 1   |   Mª. Inmaculada   Fernández- Esteban 2   |  Pedro R.   Álvarez- Pérez 3   |   Sara   Conde-Vélez 4  This is an open access article under the terms of the   Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs   License, which  permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no  modifications or adaptations are made.  © 2024 The Authors.   European Journal of Education   published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1 Department of Didactics and Educational  Research, Area of Research Methods  and Diagnosis in Education, Faculty of Education, University of La Laguna, La Laguna, Spain 2   Department of Specific Didactics, Department of Didactics of Social Sciences, Faculty of Education, University of La Laguna, La Laguna, Spain 3   Department of Didactics and Educational  Research, Area of Didactics and School  Organisation, Faculty of Education, University of La Laguna, La Laguna, Spain 4 Department of Pedagogy, Area of Research Methods and Diagnosis in Education,  Faculty of Education, University of Huelva, La Laguna, Spain  Correspondence  Mª. Inmaculada Fernández- Esteban, Faculty  of Education, University of La Laguna,  C/Heraclio Sánchez, 37, 38204 La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.  Email: mesteban@ull.edu.es  Funding information  Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación  Gobierno de España  Abstract  The   academic   dropout   of   higher   education   students represents one of the most significant challenges that university institutions have to face today. This research analysed the university academic trajectory of students who dropped out of university for good. The aim of this paper is to examine in depth the factors that influence the idea of the construction of academic dropout and its relationship with the difficulties of adaptation to the  university training system. A qualitative study was carried out in which the interview technique was applied to   n   =   34  dropout students belonging to three Spanish autonomous communities. The results made it possible to identify and examine students' difficulties in adapting to university studies   in   greater   depth.   The   interviews   revealed contextual   and   emotional   details   that   contributed   to dropout, such as personal and professional challenges and a lack of emotional support. The findings lead to the need to approach the issue from a holistic viewpoint in order to address the different reasons behind university dropouts. This broad view of the academic trajectories of university students who drop out is a benchmark for strategies to improve student retention and success in higher education.

Page 2:
2 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  1   |   I NTRO D U C TI O N A N D PU R P OS E  Academic dropout among students entering higher education is one of the problems currently facing university insti-  tutions. It is a global problem, the effects of which are reflected in practically all countries worldwide and which, far  from being eradicated, continues to increase every year (Álvarez-Pérez & Cabrera,   2020 ; Naaman,   2021; Piepenburg & Beckmann,   2021 ). In some Latin American countries (Dominican Republic, Uruguay, Bolivia, etc.), university drop - out rates are around 44.5% (Aguilera- de Fretes & Jiménez- Chaves,   2012 ; Álvarez- Ferrandiz,   2021 ; Montero- Rojas  et   al.,   2007; Urbina- Cárdenas & Ovalles- Rodriguez,   2016 ). And in both the United States and in some European coun - tries, the reality of this problem is similar, with rates close to 50% in some cases (Arce et al.,   2015; Sbravati et   al.,   2024). In Spain, 33.2% of incoming students dropped out of undergraduate studies in the 2015–2016 academic year  (Fernández- Mellizo,   2022 ), which is quite a considerable percentage (Fernández-   Mellizo,   2022). However, a dis -  tinction must be drawn between students who changed studies (12.4%) and those who dropped out of university  for good (20.8%). As Tinto   (1975 ) points out, it is important to distinguish between the two types of dropouts. The first type of dropout is temporary and is due to poor social and academic integration into a degree course. Generally, at the end of the first academic year, students realise that they are not satisfied with the studies they  have chosen and rethink their decision, leading them to enrol in another degree programme (Arce et   al.,   2015). This is referred to as “internal academic migration”, to emphasise that what takes place is mobility between de - grees, but without the students disassociating themselves from the university (Benítez et   al.,   2006). However, the second type of dropout is a more significant change, as students leave university for good, redirecting their  interests towards other educational or professional goals (Acevedo,   2021; Tinto,   1975 ). One of the main goals pursued by governments and universities is to reduce university dropout (Sbravati et   al.,   2024; Sosu & Pheunpha,   2019 ), as it has detrimental consequences on individuals (demotivation, low self-  esteem, stress, low engagement, etc.), on institutions of higher education (costs of public resources, organisational and reputational problems for the universities that have this problem, etc.) and in the social sphere (frustration, feeling of wasted time and private resources with no economic return, etc.). In this sense, the university dropout  rate is an indicator of the quality of educational plans that can have an impact on the university's reputation, prof- itability and funding (Gómez- Gallego et   al.,   2021 ). Indeed, academic dropout is one of the indicators of quality in  higher education, which shows the existence of important failures and weaknesses in the processes of transition, adaptation and promotion of students. The failure of the students, in this case, highlights the capacity of the  university centres to be socially unaccountable based on the public criteria of quality and to not fulfil the aims  entrusted to them: to train competent professionals to integrate socially and in the labour market. Defining university dropout is complex because it is difficult to find a formulation that addresses the different  types of dropouts (Acevedo,   2021 ; Viale- Tudela,   2014). Thus, depending on the causes, it may be an involuntary  dropout because the student did not comply with the administrative requirements or broke the institutional rules,  or it can be a voluntary dropout due to a change of degree studies or to pursue other activities (academic or work)  outside the university system (Gómez- Gallego et   al.,   2021; Holliman et   al.,   2018 ). In Spain, and in this study, uni -  versity dropout is understood to be the definitive abandonment of any degree course, i.e., after having enrolled  for the first time at university, students do not re- enrol for two consecutive years or graduate in 4 years after the first year (Fernández- Mellizo,   2022).  There are many reasons why students drop out of university (Álvarez-Pérez & López-Aguilar,   2019; De la  Cruz- Campos et   al.,   2023; De Vries et   al.,   2011). Research on university dropout shows different explanatory  K E Y W O R D S  academic dropout, academic trajectories, higher education, higher studies, university students 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 4:
4 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  by university students the first time they go to university? (c) What is the impact of a lack of motivation (in -  trinsic and extrinsic) on continuation or dropout from university studies? (d) Which elements cause student dissatisfaction during their first year of higher education? (e) What is the academic performance of potential dropouts?  2   |   M E TH O D  This article presents part of the narrative results of a larger R&D&I project.   i   The methodological design of  the project is mixed sequential. The method follows a multiple case study design in which the universities of La Laguna, Zaragoza and Huelva participated. In particular, the analysis of the quantitative data was used to design the interviews, select the sample and gather narrative (qualitative) data from the participants. According  to Cohen et   al.   ( 2007), qualitative data collection gives research a greater level of depth and a more holistic/global and detailed view of the problem or reality being analysed. The power of qualitative methods is that they make it possible to access meaningful data and interpretations that other quantitative methods do not. This way, as  highlighted by Gil del Pino et   al.   ( 2017), through stories, narratives and the re- enactment of events, it is possible to  know the reasons behind different actions and decisions in the field of social sciences. This study was carried out in accordance with the guidelines set out by Tong et   al.   ( 2007 ) in Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) by looking at the three domains highlighted: (1) research team and reflexivity, (2) study design and (3) analysis and findings.  2.1   |   Objectives  The aim of this work is to analyse the impact of academic trajectories on the adaptation of students to university studies, with the specific objectives being: (a) to describe the elements that affect the adaptation of students during their first year of studies; (b) examine in depth the difficulties encountered in adapting to university studies and, finally, (c) determine the motivation, satisfaction and performance of students during their studies.  2.2   |   Population and sample  For the sample selection, a non-  probabilistic purposive sample was applied according to the following criteria:  (a) permanent dropout from university studies   ii ; (b) branches of knowledge (Social and Legal Sciences, Health  Sciences, Sciences, Arts and Humanities, Engineering and Architecture), (c) academic performance and (d) sex. The participants had given up their studies at the University of La Laguna (ULL), the University of Zaragoza (UNIZAR)  and the University of Huelva (UHU). Table   1 shows the sociodemographic characteristics of the sample.  2.3   |   Instrument  Data gathering was carried out through a structured interview, as it is the optimal method for delving into the causes and personal assessments of the reasons for dropping out of university studies. This type of interview al - lows information to be collected in a systematised and equal way among the interviewees. The use of qualitative techniques provides an in- depth understanding of the motives behind each decision, the factors that determine dropout and the combination of variables that come into play (Ritacco- Real and Amores- Fernández,   2016; Tong et   al.,   2007 ). 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 5:
|   5 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  The structured interview script designed was composed of ten general core questions, which, in some cases, led to control sub- questions. This system allowed participants to relate their experiences of their academic tra- jectories and their process of adaptation to higher education. By way of example, some of the questions asked  included: (a)   Once you went to university, was it an easy path? Did you encounter difficulties? What were they? Were you faced with any important changes? What did you do about it? (b) During your time as a university student, what would you say your academic performance was like, and did you have to re- sit a subject more than once because you did not pass it? If so, why do you think this was? and (c) What would you say were the aspects that motivated you during your studies? Did you find what you expected?  In this study, it is understood that the definitive abandonment of university studies occurs when a student has stopped attending university permanently – up to the time of gathering the research data – and has no intention of returning to finish their studies or to start new ones.  2.4   |   Data gathering procedure  The research teams taking part in the study consisted of teaching and research staff, experts in the field of  university guidance and academic dropout, from five Spanish universities (ULL, UNIZAR, University of Huelva, University of Santiago de Compostela, University of Castile La Mancha). After having passed the first phase of the project (quantitative analysis), each research team contacted the people who met the sample selection criteria. First contact was established either by e- mail or a phone call. The sample was completed in three universities according to the following criteria (ULL, UNIZAR and UH).  Once the terms of participation in the interview were agreed and accepted, the interviews were held in the  months from October 2022 to January 2023. Interviews were conducted via Google Meet rooms or phone calls. The maximum duration of the interviews was 20 min. All were recorded with the informed consent of the partici- pants and subsequently transcribed.  2.5   |   Ethical questions and methodological rigour  Regarding ethical issues, the principles of integrity and reciprocity in the research process were taken into ac - count. This study was approved by the Research Ethics and Animal Welfare Committee (CEIBA) of the ULL  TA B L E 1   Sample features.  Variable Social and legal sciences  Health  sciences   Science Arts and humanities Engineering and architecture   Total  n   =   10   n   =   6   n   =   6   n   =   5   n   =   6   N   =   33  Sex Women   2   4   2   2   2   12  Men   8   2   4   3   4   21 University ULL   3   4   2   3   2   14  UNIZAR   6   2   4   1   2   15 UHU   1   –   –   1   3   4  Note :   N   =   33. Ages between 22 and 50 years of age (M   =   30.3; SD   =   6.9). Abbreviations: UHU, University of Huelva; ULL, University of La Laguna; UNIZAR, University of Zaragoza. 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 6:
6 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  (CEIBA2021- 3079). Prior to conducting the interviews, the person in charge of data collection was informed about  the purpose of the study and interview in order to comply with informed consent. Likewise, permission to record  the conversation was requested, and the protection of personal data was ensured under the aegis of Organic Law 3/2018 of 5 December on Personal Data Protection and guarantee of digital rights.  In addition, in order to prevent possible negative impacts (difficulties in generalising results, influence of con -  text, risk of subjectivising data, difficulties in accessing the sample, possible interviewer and interviewee bias) of  using the interview as a data collection technique, the research team developed a structured interview script, which was reviewed in two plenary sessions by members with expertise in qualitative methodology and in the  theoretical content addressed. The data collection protocol was also established, and interviewers were selected  who were experts in developing qualitative research techniques. With regard to questions of methodological rigour, the criteria of confirmability and transferability were  taken into account. In the first case, the starting position of the research group in terms of the research prob -  lem and categories of analysis was explicitly shown. Regarding the second criterion, a structured information  gathering instrument was designed and, in addition, informants were selected through scrupulous and well-  defined sampling.  2.6   |   Analysis and interpretation of results  Content analysis was carried out using ATLAS.Ti version 9, following the criteria or guidelines proposed by Denzin  and Lincoln   ( 2008 ). To carry out the analysis, Grounded Theory was chosen, using the Constant Comparison  Method (CQM) or procedure. The conceptual categories were generated (emerging categorisation system) and subsequently the groups of codes that would determine their properties and allow us to respond to the objectives  formulated.  The aim of the qualitative content analysis was to transform patterns of meaning into relevant categories  and subcategories (Patton,   2002). Given the complexity of the task, two researchers carried out a particular analysis of the transcripts, identifying the minimum units of meaning and obtaining the emerging categories.  As a result of the inter-  judge consensus, three categories were extracted, which, in turn, grouped together  subcategories of analysis that made it possible to better understand the narratives collected. The other re - searchers cross-  checked the analysis and assumed the inter-   judge result, thus ensuring that the results and  interpretations were true to the original meaning (Brantlinger et   al.,   2005). Table   2 shows the categorisation data from the interviews.  Thirty- four documents were uploaded to the archive, of which 33 were analysed (   n   =   4 from the University  of Huelva;   n   =   15 from the ULL;   n   =   14 from the University of Zaragoza). Two categorical systems comprising 18  codes or subcategories were generated (see   Annex , Figures   A1   and   A2 ). In addition, four groups of “memos” were created with sociodemographic characteristics.  3   |   R E S U LT S  The outcomes are presented below in accordance with the specific objectives described in the methodological section of the study. Focusing on the elements or difficulties in the adaptation of university student dropouts, the results are shown through the presentation and interpretation of the participants' narratives. The  qualitative content analysis of the narratives allowed us to organise the results based on the specific objectives and research questions of this study: (1) elements affecting the adaptation of students during their first year  of study, (2) difficulties encountered in adapting to university studies and (3) factors influencing university dropout rates. 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 7:
|   7 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  TA B L E 2   Categorisation of interviews.  Categories   Subcategories or code   N ° quotes   Percentages  Sociodemographic characteristics “memos”   Sex   33   3.78 Age   33   3.78  Degree course abandoned   33   3.78  University where you studied   33   3.78  Partial total   132   15.12  Academic pathway in university studies   Highlights of the University Academic Trajectory   45   5.15 Significant changes in the academic trajectory   38   4.35 Difficulties/facilities in accessing university studies   73   8.36 Motivation during university studies   28   3.20 Expected performance   33   3.78  Performance. Regular attendance   27   3.10  Performance. Average mark   41   4.69 Performance. Repeat subjects   30   3.43 Satisfaction with University studies   47   5.39  UAT highlights   29   3.33 Partial total   391   44.78  University dropout   Voluntary dropout   31   3.55 Dropout conditionality   38   4.35 Dropout decision confirmation   47   5.39 Perceived difficulties before starting university studies   24   2.75  Dropout moment   63   7.21  Reason behind university dropout   75   8.60  Perception of successful completion   32   3.66  Request for institutional support   40   4.59 Partial total   350   40.10 Total   873   100 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 13:
|   13 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  The multifactorial nature of academic dropout and the diversity of variables that come together to finally pro -  voke it particularly advise the use of methodologies that allow us to approach the reality of each participant and their specific circumstances, as this will allow a comprehensive understanding of this multivariate phenomenon.  As stated by Cárdenas   ( 2019), the analytical models of academic dropout are diverse, precisely because of the complexity involved in covering the universe of variables, of a very diverse nature, involved in it (some centred more on personal causes and others more of a contextual, social or institutional nature).  Analysis of the participants' accounts in the study shows that there are various factors that come into play in  the lives of students when they enter university and that determine whether they adapt to, remain in or, on the contrary, drop out of higher education. The research also confirms the importance of academic transitions and the transcendence of the first year in students' educational trajectories, where changes compared to other stages  or educational experiences give rise to an unfavourable context that leads to the idea of dropping out (Álvarez  et   al.,   2011 ; Álvarez-Pérez & López-Aguilar,   2019 ). And in relation to transitions, the need to reinforce the con-  nection between university education and the previous stages is still evident. In this sense, it is worth highlighting  the work of Gómez- Salazar and Álvarez- Gil   ( 2020), which shows an experience of practical and interactive work - shops between secondary school pupils and students and university lecturers from the degree in Architecture,  with the intention of introducing them to the field of knowledge and valuing the importance of these studies in today's society. The study confirms that it is not only academic factors (lack of knowledge of the degree, low grades and performance problems in some subjects, difficulties in adapting to the learning methodology, lack of study habits, etc.) that ultimately determine dropout, but rather other personal or emotional variables (moving house, moving away from family, loneliness, work responsibilities, having to live with strangers, having to make new friends, having to combine studies and work, financial problems in the family, etc.). One term expressed by the participants, which accurately describes the situation that many students experience during the first year of university studies, is the feeling of being “out of place”. In addition to prior performance, the lack of information and guidance available to many students entering university is often a precursor to many of them dropping out (Bernardo et   al.,   2017 ). The feelings of dissatisfaction, insecurity, stress, etc. that many students experience when starting higher education exert such great pressure that dropping out becomes the only alternative and a door of salvation to overcome all these vicissitudes.  Many students highlighted clear differences from their post- secondary studies, which undoubtedly had a neg-  ative influence on their adaptation to university, on their assessment of higher education and on the explanation for their disengagement. These differences relate to the methodologies used (the use of expository methodolo -  gies was highlighted above all), the high number of students per group, the feeling of impersonality, satisfaction with the choice of studies made and the poor infrastructure of the university centres. Other reasons given for the process of adapting to the university experience were the role of the teaching staff (low empathy, lack of acces -  sibility, lack of respect, etc.) and assessment methods (uncertainty generated by the assessment, length of tests, type of exercises, etc.).  All these problematic realities reflected in the stories should be a starting point for articulating response  measures. But it is worrying that no significant solution has been found to such a serious problem of international  importance, beyond specific actions adapted to concrete realities. As stated by Moreno- Rodríguez et   al.   ( 2022), improvement solutions should be approached in a procedural and preventive way, in order to provide a real con -  tainment of the problem of academic failure and dropout. We cannot ignore the fact that dropout has different re -  percussions, one of which is that it affects people's life projects. Those who fail to progress through the education system are constrained in terms of future possibilities and plans, and corrective improvements should be made for those who have the greatest difficulties. Those who are left out of the system, for whatever reason, are less able  to develop a satisfactory life project. As Román   ( 2013) points out, many educational practices are an invitation for students to drop out of education, and, in many cases, they are academically and socially vulnerable. For this reason, there is a call for global and profound action to address the problem of dropout, correct the deficiencies of the system and provide solutions to the diversity, vulnerability and needs of all students. Those who drop out, 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 15:
|   15 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  first- year teaching staff aware of the need to help them face the change or guiding them on the importance of  defining a training project are some real measures that can serve to prevent them from considering abandoning their studies and so that they will not feel that they have to drop out.  AC K N OW L E D G E M E N T S  This paper presents part of the results collected in the first phase of the R&D&i project “Analysis of the explanatory factors of university dropout and strategic actions for its improvement and prevention” (PID2020-114849RB-I00). Ministry of Science and Innovation of the Government of Spain.  F U N D I N G I N FO R M AT I O N  This article presents part of the narrative results of a larger R&D&I Project: R   +   D   +   i Project Analysis of the  explanatory factors for dropping out of university studies and strategic actions for their improvement and  prevention   (PID2020- 114849RB- I00).   Awarded   by   the   Ministry   of   Science   and   Innovation   (2020)   of   the  Government of Spain.  C O N F L I C T O F I N T E R E S T S TAT E M E N T  We declare that we have no financial or personal conflicts of interest that could inappropriately influence the conduct of this research.  DATA AVA I L A B I L I T Y S TAT E M E N T  The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data  are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.  P R OT EC T I O N O F P EO P L E A N D A N I M A L S  The authors declare that the procedures followed conformed to the ethical standards of the research ethics committee of the University of La Laguna, the University to which the majority of the research group belongs and which is leading the project.  DATA C O N F I D E N T I A L I T Y  The authors declare that they have followed the protocols of their work centre regarding the publication of the data of the participants as informants.  R I G H T TO P R I VAC Y A N D I N FO R M E D C O N S E N T  The authors have obtained the informed consent of the subjects referred to in the article as participants. This document is in the possession of the corresponding author.  O R C I D  Yaritza Garcés- Delgado   https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3471-1014  Mª. Inmaculada Fernández- Esteban   https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1842-7718  Pedro R. Álvarez- Pérez   https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0023-0765  Sara Conde-Vélez   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7950-5866  E N D N OT E S  i   Analysis of the explanatory factors of university dropout and strategic actions for its improvement and prevention.” (PID2020-114849RB-I00).  ii   Students who dropped out of university and have not re- enrolled in the same or other university studies for 4 to 10 years. 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 18:
18 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  Sosu, E. M., & Pheunpha, P. (2019). Trajectory of university dropout: Investigating the cumulative effect of academic vul -  nerability and proximity to family support.   Frontiers in Education ,   4 , 6.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 3389/ feduc.  2019. 00006  Tejedor, F. J., & García- Valcárcel, A. (2007). Causas del bajo rendimiento del estudiante universitario (en opinión de los  profesores y alumnos). Propuestas de mejora en el marco del EEES.   Revista de Educación ,   342 , 443–473. Tinto, V. (1975). Dropout from higher education: A theoretical synthesis of recent research.   Review of Educational Research ,  45 (1), 89–125. https://   doi. org/ 10. 3102/ 00346 54304 5001089 Tong, A., Sainsbury, P., & Craig, J. (2007). Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): A 32- item  checklist for interviews and focus groups.   International Journal for Quality in Health Care ,   19 , 349–357.   https:// doi. org/  10.   1093/ intqhc/ mzm042 Urbina- Cárdenas, J. E., & Ovalles-   Rodriguez, G. A. (2016). Abandono y permanencia en la educación superior: Una apli - cación de la Teoría Fundamentada.   Sophia ,   12 (1), 27–37. Viale- Tudela, H. E. (2014). Una aproximación teórica a la deserción estudiantil universitaria.   Revista Digital de Investigación en Docencia Universitaria ,   8 (1), 59–76. https://   doi. org/ 10. 19083/   ridu.8. 366 Zamudio, P., López, F., & Reyes- Sosa, H. (2019). La representación social del fracaso escolar. La hipótesis del núcleo cen-  tral.   Perfiles Educativos, XLI ,   165 , 27–42. https://   doi. org/ 10. 14482/   INDES. 30.1. 303. 661  How to cite this article:   Garcés- Delgado, Y., Fernández- Esteban, M. I., Álvarez- Pérez, P. R., & Conde-Vélez,  S. (2024). The process of adaptation to higher education studies and its relation to academic dropout.  European Journal of Education ,   59 , e12650. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12650 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 3:
|   3 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  models (Naaman,   2021; Tinto,   1975 ), as well as different classifications of factors/variables that attempt to ex - plain dropout (Álvarez-  Ferrandiz,   2021 ; López-Aguilar et al.,   2022; De Silva et   al.,   2022 ; Fernández- Mellizo,   2022;  Gómez- Gallego et   al.,   2021 ). Most of these papers highlight personal, institutional, economic and student–uni- versity interaction factors (Aina et   al.,   2018; Fernández- Castañon et   al.,   2017; López- Cózar- Navarro et   al.,   2020; Sbravati et   al.,   2024).  Among the personal variables that may hinder the adaptation processes are the lack of information to decide (García- de Franelli & Adrogué-  de Deane,   2015 ), previous academic performance (Gómez- Gallego et   al.,   2021), the mode of access, since students coming from vocational training are more likely to drop out of their studies as  they do not have the basic skills required in higher education (Roig- Vila,   2018 ), lack of motivation for their studies (Bergold & Steinmayr,   2018 ; Sbravati et   al.,   2024), low visibility beyond the immediate future and lack of projection into the future (Bernardo et   al.,   2015), are some of the problems and difficulties that increase the risk of failure  and dropout in university studies. Moreover, research works such as those by González- Campos et   al.   ( 2020) and  Silva- Laya   ( 2011) note that the first academic year is a critical stage in the decision to drop out or continue with  studies. Academic performance plays a decisive role in this process (Lizarte & Gijón,   2022; Pellagatti et   al.,   2021). Other difficulties and problems associated with dropping out relate to the interaction between personal and in - stitutional variables (Lorenzo et   al.,   2023 ). According to Tejedor and García- Valcárcel   (2007 ) and Jung and Kim   ( 2018 ),  some of the variables that may explain dropout are: regular non- attendance in class, organisational aspects of the institution, difficulties associated with the teaching staff (excessive demands, type of exams, inadequate assess-  ment tests, lack of communication, poor information on assessment criteria, etc.) and difficulties associated with  the student (mastery of study techniques, responsibility, level of ambition, participation and involvement in class, time management problems, inadequate study behaviour, incompatibility of study with work, etc.).  Regarding economic problems, student health problems (Li & Carroll,   2020 ) and socio- family problems (González- Ramírez & Pedraza-  Navarro,   2017 ), a series of difficulties are also identified, such as: student illness, dependence on grants, work, illness or death of a family member, living away from the locality, having to use public transport, living outside the family home, etc. Difficulties in terms of social and academic integration are also iden -  tified (Piepenburg & Beckmann,   2021). Lack of academic control and low interest in studies increase the intention  to drop out (Šabić & Puzić,   2022 ). And the difficulties of social integration in terms of the quality and quantity of teacher- student relationships and interactions between students are factors to be considered when explaining  dropout. Students who find little support from teachers and a low degree of social interaction with the class group  show a higher intention to drop out of school (Álvarez-Pérez & López-Aguilar,   2019). It could be summarised that the numerous research studies being carried out on the study of university aca - demic dropout focus on identifying explanatory factors to quantify the phenomenon, but lack information on the  student who drops out (their expectations, how they perceive the university environment, how they shape their future projection, what their relationships are like, their lifestyles, culture, etc.). To understand the magnitude of the problem, according to the data published in the report   La universidad es- pañola en cifras 19–20   (Hernández- Armenteros & Pérez-  García,   2023) in Spain, the dropout rate in undergraduate  studies at public universities during the 2019–2020 academic year was 20.17% in on- site universities and 40.84% in off- site universities. Specifically, in the first phase of the study presented in this manuscript, a total of 2210 stu -  dents from different degree programmes who had left their studies definitively up to the time of data collection  answered an ad hoc questionnaire. Of the sample, 42.2% belonged to the University of La Laguna, 12.7% to the University of Huelva, 13.8% to the University of Santiago de Compostela and 31% to the University of Zaragoza.  This paper therefore interviews students who have left university definitively in order to identify problems and difficulties in adapting to their studies according to the academic trajectories they have experienced. The  study's main contribution is an in-   depth analysis, from a qualitative approach, of the reasons behind dropping  out of university studies, examining, through personal accounts, the experiences and problems encountered  by the students who dropped out. Thus, the following research questions were proposed: (a) What elements  make it difficult for students to adapt to university during their first year? (b) Which difficulties are perceived 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 16:
16 of 20   | GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  R E F E R E N C E S  Acevedo, F. (2021). Concepts and measurement of dropout in higher education: A critical perspective from Latin America.  Issues in Educational Research ,   31 (3), 661–678. Aguilera- de Fretes, M. N., & Jiménez- Chaves, V. E. (2012). Factores de deserción universitaria en el primer curso de las carreras de Trabajo Social y Lengua Inglesa en las Facultades de Humanidades y Ciencias de la Educación y de Lenguas Vivas de la Universidad Evangélica de Paraguay.   Revista Internacional de Investigación en Ciencias Sociales ,  8 (2), 197–205. Aina, C., Baici, E., Casalone, G., & Pastore, F. (2018). The economics of university dropouts and delayed graduation: A  survey.   SSRN Electronic Journal .   https://   doi. org/ 10.  2139/ ssrn. 3153385 Amores Fernández, F. J., & Ritacco Real, M. (2016). Estudiantes en riesgo de exclusión educativa en secundaria. Percepciones del profesorado implicado en programas extraordinarios de prevención del fracaso escolar.   Enseñanza & Teaching: Revista Interuniversitaria De Didáctica ,   34 (1), 137–160. https://doi.org/10.14201/et2016341137160 Álvarez-Pérez, P. R., & Cabrera, L. (2020). Problemas psicoeducativos del alumnado universitario y respuestas al abandono desde un enfoque orientador integral y formativo. En A. Bernardo, E. Tuero, L. Almeida y J.C. Núñez (Comp.), Motivos y factores explicativos del abandono de los estudios. Claves y estrategias para superarlo (131-142). Pirámide. Álvarez, M., Figuera, P., & Torrado, M. (2011). La problemática de la transición bachillerato- universidad en la Universidad  de Barcelona.   Revista Española de Orientación y Psicopedagogía ,   22 (1), 15–27.   https:// doi. org/ 10.  5944/ reop. vol.  22.  num.1.   2011. 74 Álvarez- Ferrandiz, D. (2021). Análisis del abandono universitario en España: Un estudio bibliométrico.   Publicaciones ,  51 (2), 241–261.  Álvarez-Pérez, P. R., & López-Aguilar, D. (2019). Perfil de ingreso y problemas de adaptación del alumnado universitario según la perspectiva del profesorado//Profile of income and problems of adaptation of the university student accord -  ing to the perspective of the teacher.   REOP ,   30 (3), 46–63.   https://doi.org/10.5944/reop.vol.30.num.3.2019.26272 Arce, M. E., Crespo, B., & Mínguez- Álvarez, C. (2015). Higher education dropout in Spain- particular case of universities in  Galicia.   International Education Studies ,   8 , 247–264. https://   doi. org/ 10.  5539/ ies. v8n5p247 Benítez, J. L., y Justicia, F. (2006). El maltrato entre iguales: descripción y análisis del fenómeno.   Revista Electrónica de Investigación en Psicología Educativa ,   4 (2), 151–170. Bergold, S., & Steinmayr, R. (2018). Personality and intelligence interact in the prediction of academic achievement.  Journal of Intelligence ,   6 (2), 27. https://   doi. org/ 10. 3390/ jinte llige nce60 20027  Bernardo, A., Cerezo, R., Rodríguez- Muñiz, L. J., Núñez, J. C., Tuero, E., & Esteban, M. (2015). Predicción del abandono universitario: Variables explicativas y medidas de prevención.   Revista Fuentes ,   16 , 63–84. https://   doi. org/ 10. 12795/  revis tafue ntes.  2015. i16. 03  Bernardo, A., Cervero, A., Esteban, M., Tuero, E., Solano, P., & Casanova, J. (2017). Proyecto E- Orientación, una necesidad desde el campo de la orientación educativa.   Revista de Innovación Docente Universitaria. RIDU ,   9 , 81–95.   https:// doi.  org/   10. 1344/ RIDU2 017.9. 7 Brantlinger, E., Jimenez, R., Klingner, J., Pugach, M., & Richardson, V. (2005). Qualitative studies in special education.  Exceptional Children ,   71 , 195–207. https://   doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00144  02905 071002 Cárdenas, G. (2019). Categorías para el análisis del abandono y la permanencia escolar en la educación superior.   Revista Cumbres ,   5 (1), 21–40.  Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007).   Research methods in education . Routledge.  De la Cruz- Campos, J., Victoria- Maldonado, J., Martínez- Domingo, J., & Campos- Soto, M. (2023). Causes of academic dropout in higher education in Andalusia and proposals for its prevention at university: A systematic review.   Frontiers in Education ,   8 , 1–13.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 3389/ feduc.  2023. 1130952 De Silva, L. M. H., Chounta, I. A., Rodríguez- Triana, M. J., Roa, E. R., Gramberg, A., & Valk, A. (2022). Toward an institu- tional analytics agenda for addressing student dropout in higher education: An academic stakeholders' perspective.  Journal of Learning Analytics ,   9 (2), 179–201. https://   doi. org/ 10. 18608/   jla. 2022. 7507 De Vries, W., León Arenas, P., Romero Muñoz, J. F., & Hernández Saldaña, I. (2011). ¿Desertores o decepcionados?  Distintas causas para abandonar los estudios universitarios.   Revista de la Educación Superior ,   40 (160), 29–49.  Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds.). (2008).   The landscape of qualitative research   (3rd ed.). Sage Publications, Inc.  Fernández- Castañon, A. C., Bernardo, A., Esteban, M., Tuero, E., Carbajal, R., & Núñez, J. C. (2017). Influencia en el aban -  dono universitario de variables relacionales y sociales.   Revista de Estudios e Investigación en Psicología y Educación , (12), 46–49.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 17979/   reipe. 2017.0. 12.  2531 Fernández- Mellizo, M. (2022).   Análisis del abandono de los estudiantes de grado en las universidades presenciales en España .  Ministerio de Universidades. https://   acort  ar. link/  V08Tfl García- de Franelli, A., & Adrogué-  de Deane, C. (2015). Abandono de los estudios universitarios: Dimensión, variables  sociofamiliares asociadas al abandono de los estudios universitarios factores asociados y desafíos para la política  pública.   Revista Fuentes ,   16 , 85–106. https://   doi. org/ 10. 12795/   revis tafue ntes.  2015. i16. 04 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Page 17:
|   17 of 20 GARCݽS҃DELGADO   et   al .  Gil del Pino, M. C., García-   Fernández, C. M., & Manrique-   Gómez, M. A. (2017). El poder de las expectativas del docente en el logro académico de los escolares inmigrantes.   Revista de Pedagogía ,   38 (102), 97–121. Gómez- Gallego, M. G., Pérez de los Cobos, A. P., & Gómez- Gallego, J. C. G. (2021). Identifying students at risk to aca-  demic dropout in higher education.   Education in Science ,   11 , 427. https://   doi. org/ 10. 3390/ educs ci110  80427  Gómez- Salazar, N., & Álvarez- Gil, A. (2020). The role of the university against the abandonment of studies. Pre- university  training based on innovation and creativity workshops.   Innoeduca. International Journal of Technology and Educational Innovation ,   6 (1), 66–72.   https:// doi. org/ 10.  24310/ innoe duca.  2020. v6i1. 4412  González- Campos, J., Carvajal-  Muquillaza, C., & Aspeé-  Chacón, J. (2020). Modeling of university dropout using Markov  chains.   Uniciencia ,   34 (1), 129–146.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 15359/   ru. 34-   1. 8 González- Ramírez, T., & Pedraza-  Navarro, I. (2017). Variables sociofamiliares asociadas al abandono de los estudios uni -  versitarios.   Educatio Siglo XXI ,   35 (2), 365–388. https://   doi. org/ 10. 6018/j/ 298651 Hernández- Armenteros, J., & Pérez- García, J. A. (2023).   La universidad española en cifras   (pp. 19–20). CRUE. Universidades Españolas.   https://   acort  ar. link/ Sw4znp Holliman, A. J., Martin, A. J., & Collie, R. J. (2018). Adaptability, engagement, and degree completion: A longitudinal investi -  gation of university students.   Educational Psychology ,   38 (6), 785–799. https://   doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01443 410. 2018. 1426835 Jung, J., & Kim, Y. (2018). Exploring regional and institutional factors of international students' dropout: The South Korea  case.   Higher Education Quarterly ,   72 (2), 141–159.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 1111/ hequ. 12148  Li, I. W., & Carroll, D. R. (2020). Factors influencing dropout and academic performance: An Australian higher education equity  perspective.   Higher Education Policy and Management ,   42 (1), 14–30.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13600 80X. 2019. 1649993 Lizarte, E. J., & Gijón, J. (2022). Prediction of early dropout in higher education using the SCPQ.   Cogent Psychology ,   9 ,  2123588. https://   doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 23311 908.  2022.  2123588 López-Aguilar, D., Álvarez-Pérez, P. R., & Ravelo-González, Y.(2022). Capacidad de adaptabilidad e intención de abandono académico enestudiantes universitarios.   Revista deInvestigación Educativa ,   40 (1), 237–255. http://dx.doi.org/10.6018/ rie.463811 López- Cózar- Navarro, C., Benito- Hernández, S., & Priede- Bergamini, T. (2020). Un análisis exploratorio de los factores que inciden en el abandono universitario en titulaciones de ingeniería.   REDU ,   18 (2), 81–96.   https:// doi. org/ 10. 4995/  redu.  2020. 13294  Lorenzo, O., Galdón, S., & Lendínez, A. (2023). Factors contributing to university dropout: A review.   Frontiers in Education ,  8 , 1–13.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 3389/ feduc.  2023. 1159864 Montero- Rojas, E., Villalobos-  Palma, J., & Valverde-  Bermúdez, A. (2007). Factores institucionales, pedagógicos, psicoso - ciales y sociodemográficos asociados al rendimiento académico en la Universidad de Costa Rica: Un análisis multini -  vel.   Relieve ,   13 (2), 215–234.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 7203/ relie ve. 13.2. 4208 Moreno- Rodríguez, R., Garrote, I., Díaz, M., & Labrador, F. (2022).   Prevención del fracaso académico y del abandono escolar . Octaedro.  Naaman, H. (2021). The academic dropout wheel – analyzing the antecedents of higher education dropout in education  studies.   The European Educational Researcher ,   4 (2), 133–153.   https://   doi. org/ 10. 31757/   euer. 421 Patton, M. Q. (2002).   Qualitative research & evaluation methods   (3rd ed.). Sage.  Pellagatti, M. C., Leva, F., & Paganoni, A. M. (2021). Generalized mixed- effects random forest: A flexible approach to  predict university student dropout.   Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal ,   14 , 241–257.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ sam. 11505  Piepenburg, J. G., & Beckmann, J. (2021). The relevance of social and academic integration for students' dropout deci -  sions. Evidence from a factorial survey in Germany.   European Journal of Higher Education ,   12 , 255–276.   https:// doi.  org/   10. 1080/ 21568 235.  2021. 1930089 Roig- Vila, R. (2018).   El compromiso académico y social a través de la investigación e innovación educativas en la Enseñanza Superior . Octaedro.  Román, C. M. (2013). Factores asociados al abandono y la deserción escolar en américa latina: Una mirada en conjunto.  REICE. Revista Iberoamericana Sobre Calidad, Eficacia y Cambio en Educación ,   11 (2), 33–59. https:// revis tas. uam. es/  reice/   artic le/ view/ 2896 Romero Sánchez, E., & Hernández Pedreño, M. (2019). Análisis de las causas endógenas y exógenas del abandono escolar temprano: Una investigación cualitativa.   Educación XX1 ,   22 (1), 263–293.   https://   doi. org/ 10.  5944/ educX  X1.   21351  Šabić, J., & Puzić, S. (2022). Exploring dropout risk in higher education in Croatia: An empirical analysis.   Issues in Educational Research ,   32 (3), 1153–1173. Sbravati, G., Bornatici, S., Rainieri, G., & Ghilardi, A. (2024). The role of self- efficacy, motivation and connectedness in  dropout intention in a sample of Italian college students.   Education in Science ,   14 , 67.   https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ educs  ci140   10067  Silva- Laya, M. (2011). El primer año universitario: Un tramo crítico para el éxito académico.   Perfiles Educativos ,   33 , 102–114. 14653435, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ejed.12650 by Cochrane Latvia, Wiley Online Library on [11/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

